This Page Intentionally Left Blank
It is here to hold a place for cover for screen version.
DO NOT INCLUDE AS PART OF PRINT FILE!
2025-26 
OFFICIAL
RULES

RULES INDEX
Court Diagram	
Rule No. 1 – Court Dimensions – Equipment	

Section I – Court and Dimensions	

Section II – Equipment 	
Rule No. 2 – Officials and Their Duties	

Section I – The Game Officials	

Section II – Duties of the Officials	

Section III – Elastic Power	

Section IV – Different Decisions by Officials	

Section V – Time and Place for Decisions	

Section VI – Correcting Errors	

Section VII – Duties of Scorers	

Section VIII – Duties of Timers	
Rule No. 3 – Players, Substitutes, and Coaches	

Section I – Team 	

Section II – Starting Line-Ups	

Section III – The Captain	

Section IV – The Coach and Others	

Section V – Substitutes 	

Section VI – Uniforms (Players’ Jerseys)	
Rule No. 4 – Definitions 	

Section I – Basket/Backboard	

Section II – Dribble 	

Section III – The Gather	

Section IV – Fouls

Section V – Free Throw	

Section VI – Frontcourt/Backcourt	

Section VII – Held Ball	

Section VIII – Pivot 	

Section IX – Traveling 	

Section X – Screen 	

Section XI – Field Goal Attempt 	

Section XII – Throw-In	

Section XIII – Last Two Minutes	

Section XIV – Suspension of Play	

Section XV – Point of Interruption 	

Section XVI – Team Control	

Section XVII – Team Possession	

Section XVIII – Fumble 	
Rule No. 5 – Scoring and Timing	

Section I – Scoring 	

Section II – Timing 	

Section III – End of Period	

Section IV – Tie Score – Overtime 	

Section V – Stoppage of Timing Devices	

Section VI – Timeouts – Mandatory/Team	

Section VII – Timeout Requests 	

Section VIII – Time-In	
Rule No. 6 – Putting Ball in Play – Live/Dead Ball	

Section I – Start of Games/Periods and Others	

Section II – Live Ball	

Section III – Ball is Alive

Section IV – Dead Ball	

Section V – Jump Balls in Center Circle	

Section VI – Other Jump Balls	

Section VII – Restrictions Governing Jump Balls	
Rule No. 7 – Shot Clock	

Section I – Definition 	

Section II – Starting and Stopping of Shot Clock	

Section III – Putting Ball in Play After Violation	

Section IV – Resetting Shot Clock	
Rule No. 8 – Out-of-Bounds and Throw-In	

Section I – Player 	

Section II – Ball	

Section III – The Throw-In	
Rule No. 9 – Free Throws and Penalties	

Section I – Positions and Violations 	

Section II – Shooting of Free Throw	

Section III – Next Play	
Rule No. 10 – Violations and Penalties	

Section I – Out-of-Bounds	

Section II – Dribble 	

Section III – Thrower-In	

Section IV – Strike the Ball	

Section V – Jump Ball	

Section VI – Offensive Three-Second Rule	

Section VII – Defensive Three-Second Rule

Section VIII – Eight-Second Rule	

Section IX – Ball in Backcourt 	

Section X – Swinging of Elbows	

Section XI – Entering Basket from Below	

Section XII – Illegal Assist in Scoring	

Section XIII – Traveling 	

Section XIV – Offensive Screen Set Out-of-Bounds	

Section XV – Offensive Player Out-of-Bounds	

Section XVI – Five-Second Back-to-the-Basket Violation	

Section XVII – Flopping 	
Rule No. 11 – Basket Interference – Goaltending 	

Section I – A Player Shall Not:	
Rule No. 12A – Fouls and Penalties (Technical Foul)	

Section I – Excessive Timeouts	

Section II – Delay of Game	

Section III – Number of Players	

Section IV – Basket Ring, Backboard, or Support	

Section V – Conduct 	

Section VI – Fighting Fouls 	

Section VII – Fines 	
Rule No. 12B – Fouls and Penalties (Personal Foul)	

Section I – Types 	

Section II – By Dribbler 	

Section III – By Screening 	

Section IV – Flagrant Foul 	

Section V – Free Throw Penalty Situations

Section VI – Double Fouls	

Section VII – Offensive Fouls	

Section VIII – Loose Ball Fouls	

Section IX – Punching Fouls	

Section X – Away-From-The-Play Foul	

Section XI – Transition Take Foul	
Rule No. 13 – Instant Replay	

Section I – Instant Replay Review Triggers	

Section II – Reviewable Matters	

Section III – Replay Review Process	
Rule No. 14 – Coach’s Challenge	

Section I – Overview 	

Section II – Procedure to Initiate the Challenge	

Section III – Reviewable Matters	

Section IV – Replay Review Process	

Section V – Impact on Timeouts	

Section VI – Resumption of Play	
Comments on the Rules	

I. Guides for Administration and Application of the Rules	

II. Basic Principles	

A.	 Contact Situations 	

B.	 Fouls: Flagrant – Unsportsmanlike 	

C.	 Block-Charge	

D.	 Game Postponement and Cancellations

E.	 Physical Contact – Suspension 	

F.	 Protest 	

G.	 Shattering Backboards	

H.	 Player/Team Conduct and Dress	

I.	 Offensive Three-Seconds	

J.	 Player Conduct – Spectators 	

K.	 Fighting 	

L.	 Expiration of Time 	

M.	Verbal Fan Interference	

N.	 Guidelines for Infection Control 	

O.	 Dead Ball, Live Ball, Ball is Alive	

P.	 Taunting 	

Q.	 Flagrant Foul Criteria 	
Referee Hand Signals

APRON MUST BE AT LEAST
8 FEET FROM ENDLINES
APRON MUST BE AT LEAST
5 FEET 3 IN.
5 FT FROM SIDELINES
4 FEET MINIMUM DEPTH
4 FEET MINIMUM DISTANCE
2 IN. WIDE BY 3FT. DEEP
THE COLOR OF THE LANE
SPACE MARKS AND
NEUTRAL ZONES SHALL
CONTRAST WITH THE COLOR
OF THE BOUNDING LINES.
LANE MARKINGS MAY INCLUDE
AMATEUR MARKINGS WITH
APPROVAL FROM THE NBA
2 FEET RADIUS
(INSIDE)
6 FEET RADIUS
(OUTSIDE)
DIVISION LINE
LENGTH 94 FEET (inside)
MINIMUM 110’
MINIMUM 60’
ALL LINES SHALL BE 2 INCHES WIDE (NEUTRAL ZONES EXCLUDED)
2 INCHES WIDE BY
8 FEET 2 INCHES (INSIDE)
4 FEET
3 FEET
(INSIDE)
2 IN. WIDE
BY 6 IN. DEEP
22 FEET (OUTSIDE)
23 FEET 9 INCHES (OUTSIDE)
23 FEET 9 INCHES (OUTSIDE)
12 FEET
4 FEET
6 INCHES
3 FEET
1 FOOT
(OUTSIDE)
3 FEET
4 FEET
4 FEET
(INSIDE)
(OUTSIDE)
15 IN.
72 INCHES
16 FEET (OUTSIDE)
4 FEET DEEP
FROM BASELINE TO START OF QUADRANTS
19 FEET TO FREE THROW LINE (OUTSIDE)
18 FEET 10 INCHES (INSIDE)
13 FEET (inside)
6 INCHES
6 INCHES
18 IN. RADIUS
(INSIDE)
6 FEET RADIUS
(OUTSIDE)
15.5”
12.29”
3 FEET (outside)
14 FEET
28 FEET (INSIDE)
WIDTH 50 FEET (inside)
EACH QUADRANT 19 FEET (OUTSIDE)
OF QUADRANTS
3 FEET
4 FEET
20 FEET 11 INCHES
15 FEET

Official Rules
RULE NO. 1—COURT DIMENSIONS—EQUIPMENT
Section I—Court and Dimensions
a.	 The playing court shall be measured and marked as shown in the court diagram. 
(See page 8)
b.	 A free throw lane shall be marked at each end of the court with dimensions and 
markings as shown in the court diagram. All boundary lines are part of the lane; lane space 
marks and neutral zone marks are not. The areas identified by the lane space markings are 2” 
by 6” inches.
c.	 A free throw line shall be drawn (2” wide) across each of the circles indicated in the 
court diagram. It shall be parallel to the end line and shall be 15’ from the plane of the face 
of the backboard.
d.	 The three-point field goal area has parallel lines 3’ from the sidelines, extending from 
the baseline and an arc of 23’9” from the middle of the basket which intersects the parallel 
lines.
e.	 Four hash marks shall be drawn (2” wide) perpendicular to the sideline on each side 
of the court and 28’ from the baseline. These hash marks shall extend 3’ onto the court.
f.	 Two hash marks shall be drawn (2” wide) perpendicular to the baseline on each side 
of the free throw lane line. These hash marks shall be 3’ from the free throw lane line and 
extend 6” onto the court.
g.	 Four hash marks shall be drawn (2” wide) parallel to the baseline on each side of the 
free throw circle. These hash marks shall be 13’ from the baseline and 3’ from the free throw 
lane lines and shall be 6” in length.
h.	 Two hash marks shall be drawn (2” wide) perpendicular to the sideline, in front of 
the scorer ’s table, and 4’ on each side of the midcourt line. This will designate the 
Substitution Box.
i.	 A Restricted Area shall be marked with a half-circle 4’ from the center of the basket 
ring and then parallel to the lane line to the face of the backboard with a solid two-inch line.
Section II—Equipment
a.	 The backboard shall be a rectangle measuring 6’ horizontally and 3 ½’ vertically. The 
front surface shall be flat and transparent.
b.	 A transparent backboard shall be marked with a 2” white rectangle centered behind 
the ring. This rectangle shall have outside dimensions of 24” horizontally and 18” vertically.
c.	 Home management is required to have a spare board with supporting unit on hand 
for emergencies, and a steel tape or extension ruler and a level for use if necessary.
d.	 Each basket shall consist of a pressure-release NBA approved metal safety ring 
18” in inside diameter with a white cord net 18” in length. The cord of the net shall not 
be less than 30 thread nor more than 120 thread and shall be constructed to check the ball 
momentarily as it passes through the basket.
e.	 Each basket ring shall be securely attached to the backboard with its upper edge 10’ 
above and parallel to the floor and equidistant from the vertical edges of the board. The 
nearest point of the inside edge of the ring shall be 6” from the plane of the face of the 
board. The ring shall be painted orange.

f.	 (1) The ball shall be an officially approved NBA ball between 7 ½ and 8 ½ pounds 
pressure. 

(2) A minimum of nine balls must be made available to each team for pre-game 
warmup.
g.	 NBA arena backboards must contain four strips of red LED lights, synchronized 
with the game clock, outlining the inside of the four sides of the backboard to indicate the 
expiration of time and one strip of an amber LED light to indicate the expiration of the 
shot clock.
RULE NO. 2—OFFICIALS AND THEIR DUTIES
Section I—The Game Officials
a.	 The game officials shall be a Crew Chief, Referee, Umpire, and Replay Center Official. 
They will be assisted by an official scorer, two trained timers, and courtside administrator. 
One timer will operate the game clock and the other will operate the shot clock. The courtside 
administrator will be stationed at the scorer’s table to facilitate communication between the Replay 
Center Official, on-court game officials, official scorer, and other personnel at the scorer’s table. 
All officials and the courtside administrator shall be approved by the League Office.
b.	 The officials shall wear the uniform prescribed by the NBA.
Section II—Duties of the Officials
a.	 The officials shall, prior to the start of the game, inspect and approve all equipment, 
including court, baskets, balls, backboards, and timer’s and scorer’s equipment.
b.	 The officials shall not permit players to play with any type of jewelry.
c.	 The officials shall not permit any player to wear equipment which, in their judgment, 
is dangerous to other players. Any equipment which is of hard substance (casts, splints, 
guards and braces) must be padded or foam covered and have no exposed sharp or cutting 
edge. All the face masks and eye or nose protectors must be approved by NBA Basketball 
Operations and conform to the contour of the face and have no sharp or protruding edges.
d.	 The use of any foreign substance during games is strictly prohibited. A “foreign 
substance” is any substance that is applied during games to a player’s body, uniform or 
equipment, or to any game equipment, that is designed or intended to provide a player or a 
team with a competitive advantage.
e.	 All equipment used must be appropriate for basketball. Equipment that is unnatural 
and designed to increase a player’s height or reach, or to gain an advantage, shall not  
be used.
f.	 The officials must check the game balls to see that they are properly inflated. The 
recommended ball pressure should be between 7 ½ and 8 ½ pounds.
g.	 The crew chief shall be the official in charge.
h.	 The Replay Center Official will make the final ruling on all replays initiated pursuant 
to Rule 13, except for Flagrant Fouls and Altercations. The Replay Center Official’s duties with 
respect to the Coach’s Challenge are set forth in Rule 14, Section IV.
i.	 If a coach desires to discuss a rule or interpretation of a rule prior to the start of a game 
or between periods, it will be mandatory for the officials to ask the other coach to be present 
during the discussion. The same procedure shall be followed if the officials wish to discuss a 
game situation with either coach.
j.	 The designated official shall toss the ball at the start of the game. The crew chief shall 
decide whether or not a goal shall count if the officials disagree, and he/she shall decide matters 
upon which scorers and timers disagree.

k.	 All officials shall enter the court prior to the 15-minute mark on the game clock to 
observe the warm-up period and report to the League Office any atypical situations and to 
review scoring and timing procedures with table personnel.
l.	 The crew chief must check the active list prior to the start of the game.
m.	 Officials must meet with team captains prior to the start of the game.
n.	 Officials must report any atypical or unique incident to the Basketball and Referee 
Operations Departments by e-mail. Flagrant, punching, fighting fouls or a team’s failure to 
have eight players to begin the game must also be reported.
Section III—Elastic Power
The officials shall have the power to make decisions on any point not specifically 
covered in the rules. The League Office will be advised of all such decisions at the earliest 
possible moment.
Section IV—Different Decisions by Officials
a.	 The crew chief shall have the authority to set aside or question decisions regarding a 
rule interpretation made by either of the other officials.
b.	 If two officials give conflicting signals as to who caused the ball to go out-of- 
bounds, they will conference and reconstruct the play in an attempt to make the correct call. If 
no resolution is reached, a jump ball will be signaled between the two players involved at the 
nearest circle. If the two players cannot be identified, the jump ball shall be administered at the 
center circle between any two opponents in the game. If one official signals and another 
official clearly knows the call is incorrect, they should conference and the calling official 
may change the call on the information given. However, if both officials are adamant about their 
ruling, a jump ball should be held similar to above.
c.	 In the event that a violation and foul occur at the same time, the foul will take 
precedence.
d.	 Double Foul (See Rule 12B, Section VI(f)).
e.	 If the two officials differ on a block/charge foul involving the restricted area and/
or lower defensive box, they will conference and share information in an attempt to make the 
correct call. If no resolution is reached it will be treated as a double foul (See Rule 12B, Section 
VI(f)).
EXCEPTION: Last two minutes of fourth period and last two minutes of overtime. (See 
Rule 13, Section I(a)(11))
Section V—Time and Place for Decisions
a.	 The officials have the power to render decisions for infractions of rules committed 
inside or outside the boundary lines. This includes periods when the game may be stopped 
for any reason.
b.	 When a personal foul or violation occurs, an official will blow his/her whistle to 
terminate play. The whistle is the signal for the timer to stop the game clock. If a personal 
foul has occurred, the official will indicate the number of the offender to the official scorer, 
the type of foul committed and the number of free throws, if any, to be attempted or indicate 
the spot of the throw-in.
If a violation has occurred the official will indicate (1) the nature of the violation by giving 
the correct signal, (2) the number of the offender, if applicable, and (3) the direction in which 
the ball will be advanced.

c.	 When a team is entitled to a throw-in, an official shall clearly signal (1) the act 
which caused the ball to become dead, (2) the spot of the throw-in, and (3) the team entitled to 
the throw-in, unless it follows a successful field goal or free throw.
d.	 When a whistle is erroneously sounded, whether the ball is in a possession or 
non- possession status, it is an inadvertent whistle and shall be interpreted as a suspension-
of-play.
e.	 An official may suspend play for any unusual circumstance (See Rule 4, 
Section XIV).
Section VI—Correcting Errors
A.	
Free Throws
Officials may correct an error if a rule is inadvertently set aside and results in the 
following:
(1)	A team not shooting a merited free throw that will remain in play. 
EXCEPTION: If the offensive team scores or shoots earned free throws as a result of a 
personal foul prior to possession by the defensive team, the error shall be ignored if more 
than 24 seconds has expired.
(2)	A team not shooting a merited free throw that will not remain in play. The error shall 
be corrected, all play shall stand and play will resume from the point of interruption with 
the clocks remaining the same.
(3)	A team shooting an unmerited free throw.
(4)	Permitting the wrong player to attempt a free throw.
Officials shall administer the above cases as follows:
a.	 Officials shall be notified of a possible error at the first dead ball.
b.	 Errors which occur in the first or third periods must be discovered and rectified prior 
to the start of the next period.
c.	 Errors which occur in the second period must be discovered and the scorer’s table 
notified prior to the officials leaving the floor at the end of the period. The error(s) must be 
rectified prior to the start of the third period.
d.	 Errors which occur in the fourth period or overtime(s) must be discovered and rectified 
prior to the end of the period.
e.	 The ball is not in play on corrected free throw attempt(s). Play is resumed at the same 
spot and under the same conditions as would have prevailed had the error not been discovered. 
f.	 All play that occurs is to be nullified if the error is discovered within a 24-second time 
period. The game clock shall be reset to the time that the error occurred.
EXCEPTION: Acts of unsportsmanlike conduct and all flagrant fouls, and points scored 
therefrom, shall not be nullified.
EXCEPTION: If the error to be corrected is for a free throw attempt where there is to be 
no line-up of players on the free throw lane (technical foul, defensive three seconds, flopping, 
flagrant foul, clear path-to-the-basket foul, transition take foul, punching foul, away-from-the-
play foul), the error shall be corrected, all play shall stand, and play shall resume from the point 
of interruption with the clocks remaining the same.

B.	
Lineup Positions
In any jump ball situation, if the jumpers lined up incorrectly, and the error is discovered:
(1)	After more than 24 seconds has elapsed, the teams will continue to shoot for that 
basket for the remainder of that half and/or overtime. If the error is discovered in the first half, 
teams will shoot at the proper basket as decided by the opening tap for the second half.
(2)	If 24 seconds or less has elapsed, all play shall be nullified.
EXCEPTION: Acts of unsportsmanlike conduct, all flagrant fouls, and points scored 
therefrom, shall not be nullified and play will resume from the original jump ball with players 
facing the proper direction.
C.	
Throw-In
If the second, third or fourth period or any throw-in begins with the wrong team being 
awarded possession or the teams facing in the wrong direction, and the error is discovered:
(1)	after 24 seconds has elapsed, the error cannot be corrected.
(2)	with 24 seconds or less having elapsed, all play shall be nullified.
EXCEPTION: Acts of unsportsmanlike conduct, all flagrant fouls, and points scored 
therefrom, shall not be nullified.
D.	
Record Keeping
A record keeping error by the official scorer which involves the score, number of 
personal fouls, team fouls and/or timeouts may be corrected by the officials at any time prior 
to the end of the fourth period. Any such error which occurs in overtime must be corrected 
prior to the end of that period.
Section VII—Duties of Scorers
a.	 The scorers shall record the field goals and free throws made and missed and shall 
keep a running summary of the points scored. They shall record the personal and technical fouls 
called on each player and shall notify the officials immediately when a sixth personal foul, or 
second unsportsmanlike technical foul, is called on any player. They shall record the timeouts 
charged to each team, shall notify a team and its coach through an official whenever that team 
is granted its final timeout, and shall notify the nearest official each time a team is granted a 
charged timeout in excess of the legal number. They shall also record if and when a team uses a 
Coach’s Challenge and the impact of the Challenge, if any, on the number of timeouts remaining 
for the challenging team (See Rule 14). In case there is a question about an error in the scoring, 
the scorer shall check with the crew chief at once to find the discrepancy. If the error cannot be 
found, the official shall accept the record of the official scorer, unless he/she has knowledge that 
forces him/her to decide otherwise. 
b.	 The scorers shall keep a record of the names, numbers and positions of the players 
who are to start the game and of all substitutes who enter the game. When there is an infraction 
of the rules pertaining to submission of the active list, substitutions or numbers of players, 
they shall notify the nearest official immediately if the ball is dead, or as soon as it 
becomes dead if it is in play when the infraction is discovered. The scorer shall mark the 
time at which players are disqualified by reason of receiving six personal fouls, so that it 
may be easy to ascertain the order in which the players are eligible to go back into the game in 
accordance with Rule 3, Section I.
c.	 The scorers shall ask the timer to sound the horn to signal the officials. This may 
be used when the ball is dead or in certain specified situations when the ball is in control of 
a given team.

When a player is disqualified from the game, or whenever a penalty free throw is being 
awarded, the timer will sound the horn to notify the game officials. It is the duty of the 
scorekeeper to inform the timer to sound the horn and be certain that the officials have 
acknowledged a player’s sixth personal foul and/or the penalty is in effect.
d.	 The scorer shall not signal the officials while the ball is in play, except to notify 
them of the necessity to correct an error.
e.	 Should the scorer sound the horn while the ball is in play, it shall be ignored by the 
players on the court. The officials must use their judgment in stopping play to consult with 
the scorer’s table.
f.	 Scorers shall record on the scoreboard the number of team fouls up to a total of five, 
which will indicate that the team is in a penalty situation.
g.	 Scorers shall, immediately, record the name of the team which secures the first 
possession of the game.
Section VIII—Duties of Timers
a.	 The timers shall note when each half is to start and shall notify the crew chief and 
both coaches five minutes before this time, or cause them to be notified at least five minutes 
before the half is to start. They shall signal the scorers two minutes before starting time. They 
shall record playing time and time of stoppages as provided in the rules. The official timer 
and the shot clock operator shall be provided with digital stop watches to be used in case the 
official timeout, game clock, and/or shot clocks/game clocks located above the backboards fail 
to work properly.
b.	 At the beginning of the first period, any overtime period, or whenever play is resumed 
by a jump ball, the game clock shall be started when the ball is legally tapped by either of the 
jumpers. The shot clock will be started when player possession of the ball is obtained. No time 
will be removed from the game clock and/or shot clock if the ball is not legally touched before 
a violation.
c.	 If the game clock has been stopped and the ball is put in play by a throw-in, the 
game clock and the shot clock shall be started when the ball is legally touched by any player 
on the court. The starting of the game clock and the shot clock will be under  the control of the 
official timer.
d.	 During an unsuccessful free throw attempt, the game clock will be started  when the 
ball is legally touched. The shot clock will  be  started  when player possession of the ball is 
obtained.
e.	 The game clock shall be stopped at the expiration of time for each period and when 
an official sounds his/her whistle. The timers shall record only the actual playing time in the last 
minute of the first, second, and third periods. They shall record only the actual playing time in 
the last two minutes of the fourth period and the last two minutes of any overtime period(s).
f.	 For a charged timeout, the timer shall start the Time-out Clock immediately after an 
official signals for a timeout and play will not resume until the Time-out Clock has expired.
g.	 The game clock and the scoreboard will combine to cause a horn to sound, 
automatically, when playing time for the period has expired. If the horn or buzzer fails to sound, 
or is not heard, the official timer shall use any other means to notify the officials immediately.
h.	 In a dead ball situation, if the clock shows :00.0, the period or game is considered to 
have ended although the horn may not have sounded.
EXCEPTION: See Rule 13

RULE NO. 3—PLAYERS, SUBSTITUTES, AND COACHES
Section I—Team
a.	 Each team shall consist of five players. A player is disqualified from the game when 
he receives his sixth personal foul. No team may be reduced to less than five players. If 
a player in the game receives his sixth personal foul and all substitutes have already been 
disqualified, said player shall remain in the game and shall be charged with a personal and 
team foul. A technical foul also shall be assessed against his team. All subsequent personal 
fouls, including offensive fouls, shall be treated similarly. All players who have six or more 
personal fouls and remain in the game shall be treated similarly.
b.	 In the event that there are only five eligible players remaining and one of these 
players is injured and must leave the game or is ejected, he must be replaced by the last player 
who was disqualified by reason of receiving six personal fouls. Each subsequent requirement 
to replace an injured or ejected player will be treated in this inverse order. Any such re-entry 
into a game by a disqualified player shall be penalized by a technical foul.
c.	 In the event that a player leaves the playing court while the ball is in play, play will 
continue until the next stoppage of play and the player will be replaced if he is not ready to 
return. No technical foul will be assessed, but the incident will be reviewed by the League 
Office for a possible fine and/or suspension.
EXCEPTION: Rule 10, Section XV
Section II—Starting Line-Ups
At least 30 minutes before the game is scheduled to begin, the scorers shall be supplied 
with the name and number of each player who will start the game. Failure to comply with this 
provision shall be reported to the League Office.
Section III—The Captain
a.	 A team may have a captain and a co-captain numbering a maximum of two. The 
designated captain may be anyone on the active list who is in uniform, except a player-coach.
b.	 The designated captain is the only player who may ask an official about a rule 
interpretation during a timeout charged to his team. He may not discuss a judgment decision.
c.	 If the designated captain continues to sit on the bench, he remains the captain for the 
entire game.
d.	 In the event that the captain is absent from the court and bench, his coach shall 
immediately designate a new captain.
Section IV—The Coach and Others
a.	 The coach’s position may be on or off the bench from the substitution box line 
(closest to the coach’s bench) to the baseline. A coach is not permitted to cross the midcourt 
line and violators will be assessed an unsportsmanlike technical foul immediately. All 
assistants and trainers must remain on the bench. Coaches and trainers are not permitted to 
go to the scorer’s table, for any reason, except during a dead ball.
b.	 A player-coach, if permitted under NBA regulations, will have no special privileges. 
He is to conduct himself in the same manner as any other player.
c.	 Any club personnel not seated on the bench must conduct themselves in a manner that 
would reflect favorably on the dignity of the game and the officials. Violations by any of the 
personnel indicated shall require a written report to the League Office for subsequent action.
d.	 The first row of a team’s bench shall be occupied only by a league-approved head 
coach, a maximum of three assistant coaches, players, and a trainer. During an altercation, the 
head and assistant coaches are permitted on the court as “peacemakers”.

e.	 If a player, coach, or assistant coach is suspended from a game or games, he/she shall 
not at any time before, during, or after such game or games appear in any part of the arena or 
stands where his/her team is playing. A player, coach, or assistant coach who is ejected may 
only remain in the dressing room of his/her team during the remainder of the game, or leave the 
building. A violation of this rule shall call for an automatic fine of $2,000.
Section V—Substitutes
a.	 A substitute shall report to the scorer and position himself in the vicinity of the 8’ 
Substitution Box located in front of the scorer’s table. For purposes of this rule, the vicinity 
of the 8’ Substitution Box means the area from between the 28’ hash mark closest to the 
bench of the player’s team and the midcourt line. He shall inform the scorer whom he is 
going to replace. The scorer shall sound the horn to indicate a substitution. The horn does not 
have to be sounded if the substitution occurs between periods or during timeouts.
b.	 The substitute shall remain in the vicinity of the 8’ Substitution Box until he is 
beckoned onto the court by an official. If the ball is about to become live, the beckoning 
signal shall be withheld.
c.	 A substitute must be ready to enter the game when beckoned. No delays for removal 
of warm-up clothing will be permitted.
d.	 The substitute shall not replace a free throw shooter or a player involved in a jump 
ball unless dictated to do so by an injury or ejection. (EXCEPTION: Rule 6, Section VI(b) and 
Rule 9, Section II(a)(2)). At no time may he be allowed to attempt a free throw awarded as a 
result of a technical foul.
e.	 A substitute shall be considered as being in the game when he is beckoned onto the 
court or recognized as being in the game by an official. Once a player is in the game, he can- 
not be removed until the ball is legally touched by a player on the court unless: (1) a personal 
or technical foul is called, (2) there is a change of possession, (3) a timeout is granted, or (4) 
administration of infection control rule.
f.	 A substitute may be recalled from the scorer’s table prior to being beckoned onto 
the court by an official.
g.	 A player may be replaced and allowed to re-enter the game as a substitute during 
the same dead ball.
h.	 A player must be in the vicinity of the 8’ Substitution box at the time a violation 
occurs if the throw-in is to be administered in the backcourt. If a substitute fails to meet this 
requirement, he may not enter the game until the next legal opportunity.
EXCEPTION: In the last two minutes of each period or overtime, a reasonable amount 
of time will be allowed for a substitution.
i.	 If a free throw(s) is awarded, substitutes are only permitted to enter the game prior 
to the final free throw attempt if the ball will remain in play or following the final free throw 
attempt if it will not remain in play unless necessitated by disqualification, injury, ejection 
or any other atypical situation.
j.	 No substitutes may enter the game after a successful field goal by either team, unless 
the ball is dead due to a personal foul, technical foul, timeout, infection control or violation.
k.	 No substitutes are allowed to enter the game during an official’s suspension-of-play 
for (1) a delay-of-game warning, (2) retrieving an errant ball, (3) an inadvertent whistle, (4)
instant replay review, (5) re-setting the timing devices, or (6) any other unusual circumstance.
EXCEPTIONS:
(1)	Suspension of play for a player bleeding. See Comments on the Rules, Section II(N).
(2)	Seriously-injured player. Player must be removed and opponent is permitted one 
substitution.

l.	 A substitute shall not be allowed to re-enter the game after being disqualified.     
EXCEPTION:  Rule 3, Section I(b)
m.	 Notification of all above infractions and ensuing procedures shall be in accordance 
with Rule 2, Section VII.
Section VI—Uniforms
a.	 Each player shall be numbered on the front and back of his jersey with a number 
contrasting with the color of the shirt.
b.	 Each number must be no less than ¾” width, 4’’ height on the front, and 6’’ height on 
the back. Each player shall have his surname affixed to the back of his game jersey in letters at 
least 2½” in height. Some exceptions to the front number height and surname may exist from 
time to time.
c.	 The home team shall wear light color jerseys, and the visitors dark jerseys unless 
otherwise approved. For neutral court games and doubleheaders, the second team named in the 
official schedule shall be regarded as the home team and shall wear the light colored jerseys.
RULE NO. 4—DEFINITIONS
Section I—Basket/Backboard
a.	 A team’s basket consists of the basket ring and net through which its players try to 
shoot the ball. The visiting team, or for a neutral site game, the first team named in the official 
schedule, has the choice of baskets for the first half. The basket selected by the visiting team, or 
for a neutral site game, the first team named in the official schedule, when it first enters onto the 
court shall be its basket for the first  half.
b.	 The teams change baskets for the second half. All overtime periods are considered 
extensions of the second half.
c.	 Five sides of the backboard (front, two sides, bottom, and top) are considered in play 
when contacted by the basketball. The back of the backboard and the area directly behind it 
are out-of-bounds.
Section II—Dribble
A dribble is movement of the ball, caused by a player in control, who throws or taps the 
ball to the floor.
a.	 The dribble ends when the dribbler:
(1)	Touches the ball simultaneously with both hands
(2)	Permits the ball to come to rest while he is in control of it
(3)	Tries for a field goal
(4)	Throws a pass
(5)	Touches the ball more than once while dribbling, before it touches the floor
(6)	Loses control
(7)	Allows the ball to become dead
(8)	Otherwise gathers the ball (See Rule 4, Section III(b)) 
Section III—The Gather
a.	 For a player who receives the ball via a pass or gains possession of a loose ball, the 
gather is defined as the point where the player gains enough control of the ball to hold it, change 
hands, pass, shoot, or the player cradles the ball against his body.  
b.	 For a player who is in control of the ball while dribbling, the gather is defined as the 
point where a player does any one of the following:

(1)	Puts two hands on the ball, or otherwise permits the ball to come to rest, while he 
is in control of it; 
(2)	Puts a hand under the ball and brings it to a pause;
(3)	Otherwise gains enough control of the ball to hold it, change hands, pass, shoot, or 
the player cradles the ball against his body.
Section IV—Fouls
a.	 A common personal foul is illegal physical contact which occurs with an opponent 
after the ball has become live and before the horn sounds to end the period. If time expires before 
the personal foul occurs, the personal foul should be disregarded, unless it was unsportsmanlike.
EXCEPTION: If the foul is committed on or by a player in the act of shooting, and the 
shooter released the ball prior to the expiration of time on the game clock, then the foul 
should be administered in the same manner as with any similar play during the course of the 
game (See Rule 13, Section II(b)(ii)).
b.	 A technical foul is the penalty for unsportsmanlike conduct or violations by team 
members on the floor or seated on the bench.
c.	 A double foul is a situation in which any two opponents commit personal fouls at 
approximately the same time.
d.	 An offensive foul is illegal contact, committed by an offensive player, after the ball 
is live and there is team control.
e.	 A loose ball foul is illegal contact, after the ball is alive, when team control does 
not exist.
f.	 A flagrant foul is unnecessary and/or excessive contact committed by a player against 
an opponent whether the ball is dead or alive.
g.	 A punching foul is a punch by a player which makes contact with an opponent 
whether the ball is dead or alive.
h.	 An away-from-the-play foul is illegal contact by the defense (1) in the last two 
minutes of each period, and last two minutes of any overtime periods, which occurs deliberately 
away from the immediate area of offensive action, or (2) prior to the ball being released on a 
throw-in at any point during the entire game.
i.	 A transition take foul is a foul where:
(1)	The defender commits a take foul (a foul in which the defender does not make a play 
on the ball) against any offensive player;
(2)	The foul is committed either (i) during a transition scoring opportunity or (ii) 
immediately following a change of possession and before the offensive team has the 
opportunity to advance the ball;  
(3)	The foul does not meet the criteria for a clear path foul; and
(4)	The foul does not occur in the last two minutes of (i) the fourth period or (ii) any 
overtime period.
For purposes of this rule, a transition scoring opportunity:
(5)	Exists when, following a change in possession, the offensive team is continuously 
advancing the ball while it has an advantage based on the speed of the play, the position of 
the defenders, or both; and
(6)	Does not exist if the (i) offensive team does not push the speed of the play 
immediately following the change in possession, (ii) progress of the offensive team has slowed 
considerably or stopped,  (iii) offensive team runs or attempts to run a set play or action in the 
half-court, or (iv) offensive player is fouled in the act of shooting.

Section V—Free Throw
A free throw is the privilege given a player to score one point by an unhindered attempt 
for the goal from a position directly behind the free throw line. This attempt must be made 
within 10 seconds.
Section VI—Frontcourt/Backcourt
a.	 A team’s frontcourt consists of that part of the court between its endline and the nearer 
edge of the midcourt line, including the basket and inbounds part of the backboard.
b.	 A team’s backcourt consists of the entire midcourt line and the rest of the court to 
include the opponent’s basket and inbounds part of the backboard.
c.	 A ball being held by a player: (1) is in the frontcourt if neither the ball nor the player is 
touching the backcourt, (2) is in the backcourt if either the ball or player is touching the backcourt.
d.	 A ball being dribbled is (1) in the frontcourt when the ball and both feet of the player are 
in the frontcourt, (2) in the backcourt if the ball or either foot of the player is in the backcourt.
e.	 The ball is considered in the frontcourt once it has broken the plane of the midcourt 
line and is not in player control.
f.	 The team on offense must bring the ball across the midcourt line within 8 seconds.
EXCEPTION: (1) kicked ball, (2) punched ball, (3) personal or technical foul on the 
defensive team, (4) delay-of-game warning on the defensive team, or (5) infection control.
g.	 Frontcourt/backcourt status is not attained until a player with the ball has established 
a positive position in either half during (1) a jump ball, (2) a steal by a defensive player, (3) a 
throw-in in the last two minutes of the fourth period and last two minutes of any overtime period, 
or (4) any time the ball is loose.
Section VII—Held Ball
A held ball occurs when two opponents have one or both hands firmly on the ball or 
when a defensive player touches the ball causing the offensive player to return to the floor 
with the ball in his continuous possession which would result in a traveling violation.
A held ball should not be called until both players have hands so firmly on the ball that 
neither can gain sole possession without undue roughness. If a player is lying or sitting on 
the floor while in possession, he should have an opportunity to throw the ball.
Section VIII—Pivot
a.	 A pivot takes place when a player, who is holding the ball, steps once or more than once 
in any direction with the same foot, with the other foot (pivot foot) in contact with the floor.
b.	 If the player wishes to dribble after a pivot, the ball must be out of his hand before 
the pivot foot is raised off the floor. If the player raises his pivot off the floor, he must pass or 
attempt a field goal before the foot is returned to the floor.
If he fails to follow these guidelines, he has committed a traveling violation.
Section IX—Traveling
Traveling is progressing in any direction while in possession of the ball, which is in 
excess of prescribed limits as noted in Rule 4, Section VII and Rule 10, Section XIII.
Section X—Screen
A screen is the legal action of a player who, without causing undue contact, delays or 
prevents an opponent from reaching a desired position.

Section XI—Field Goal Attempt
A field goal attempt is a player’s attempt to shoot the ball into his basket for a field 
goal. The act of shooting starts when, in the official’s judgment, the player has started his 
shooting motion and continues until the shooting motion ceases and he returns to a normal 
floor position. For jump shots, the shooting motion starts when the offensive player starts to 
bring the ball upward towards the basket. On drives to the basket or other moving shots, the 
shooting motion starts when the player gathers the ball and continues through with a shot 
(except during a take foul situation when the clocks are not expiring, the shooting begins 
when the player’s shoulders start upward). It is not essential that the ball leave the shooter’s 
hand. His arm(s) might be held so that he cannot actually make an attempt.
The term is also used to include the flight of the ball until it becomes dead or is touched 
by a player. A tap during a jump ball or rebound is not considered a field goal attempt. How- 
ever, anytime a live ball is in flight toward the rim from the playing court, the goal, if made, 
shall count, even if time expires or the official’s whistle sounds. The field goal will not be 
scored if time on the game clock expires before the ball leaves the player’s hand or the ball 
is in flight toward the rim.
Section XII—Throw-In
A throw-in is a method of putting the ball in play from out-of-bounds in accordance 
with Rule 8, Section III. The throw-in begins when the ball is given to and controlled by the 
player inbounding, or at his disposal, and ends when the ball is released.
Section XIII—Last Two Minutes
When the game clock shows 2:00, the period is considered to be in the two-minute period.
Section XIV—Suspension of Play
An official can suspend play for a delay-of-game warning, retrieving an errant ball, an 
inadvertent whistle, instant replay review, re-setting the timing devices, or any other unusual 
circumstance. During such a suspension, neither team is permitted to substitute and the defensive 
team may not be granted a timeout. Play shall be resumed at the point of interruption (i.e., where 
the ball is located when the whistle sounds); except that, when neither team has possession 
of the ball at the time of the whistle, a team shall be awarded possession if, at the time of the 
whistle, such team clearly and conclusively would have imminently gained possession of the 
ball, as determined by (1) the proximity of opposing player(s) to the ball (or lack thereof), and 
(2) the actual outcome of the play in the natural and immediate aftermath of the whistle.
EXCEPTIONS:
(1)	Suspension of play for a player bleeding. See Comments on the Rules, Section II(N).
(2)	Seriously-injured player. Player must be removed and opponent is permitted 
one substitution.
Section XV—Point of Interruption
The Point of Interruption is where the ball is located when the whistle sounds.
Section XVI—Team Control
A team is in control when a player is holding, dribbling, or passing the ball. Team 
control ends when the defensive team deflects the ball or there is a field goal attempt.

Section XVII—Team Possession
A team is in possession when a player is holding, dribbling, or passing the ball. Team 
possession ends when the defensive team gains possession or the ball hits the rim of the 
offensive team.
Section XVIII—Fumble
A player who is holding the ball and fumbles it out of his control may recover the ball. 
If his pivot foot moves to recover the ball, he must then pass or shoot the ball. If he fumbles 
and recovers it without moving his pivot foot and before the ball touches the floor, he retains 
his status before the fumble.
RULE NO. 5—SCORING AND TIMING
Section I—Scoring
a.	 A legal field goal or free throw attempt shall be scored when a ball from the playing 
area enters the basket from above and remains in or passes through the net.
b.	 A successful field goal attempt from the area on or inside the three-point field goal 
line shall count as two points.
c.	 A successful field goal attempt from the area outside the three-point field goal line 
shall count as three points.
(1)	The shooter must have at least one foot on the floor outside the three-point field 
goal line prior to the attempt.
(2)	The shooter may not be touching the floor on or inside the three-point field 
goal line.
(3)	The shooter may contact the three-point field goal line, or land in the two-point 
field goal area, after the ball is released.
d.	 A field goal accidentally scored in an opponent’s basket shall be added to the 
opponent’s score, credited to the opposing player nearest the player whose actions caused the 
ball to enter the basket.
e.	 It is a violation for a player to attempt a field goal at an opponent’s basket. The 
opposing team will be awarded the ball at the free throw line extended.
f.	 A successful free throw attempt shall count as one point.
g.	 An unsuccessful free throw attempt which is tapped into the basket shall count as 
two points and shall be credited to the player who tapped the ball in.
h.	 If there is a discrepancy in the score and it cannot be resolved, the running score 
shall be official.
Section II—Timing
a.	 All periods of regulation play in the NBA will be twelve minutes.
b.	 All overtime periods of play will be five minutes.
c.	 Fifteen minutes will be permitted between halves of all games.
d.	 2:30 will be permitted between the first and second periods, the third and fourth 
periods, and before any overtime period during local games. For national TV games 3:30 will 
be permitted between the first and second periods, and between the third and fourth periods and 
2:30 before any overtime period.

e.	 A team is permitted a total of 30 seconds to replace a disqualified player.
f.	 The game is considered to be in the two-minute part when the game clock shows 
2:00 or less time remaining in the period.
g.	 The public address operator is required to announce that there are two minutes 
remaining in each period.
h.	 The game clock shall be equipped to show tenths-of-a-second during the last minute 
of each period.
Section III—End of Period
a.	 Each period ends when time expires. 
EXCEPTIONS:
(1)	If a field goal attempt is in flight toward the basket, the period ends when the goal 
is made, missed, or touched by an offensive player.
(2)	If the official’s whistle sounds prior to :00.0 on the clock, the period is not over and 
time must be added to the clock.
(3)	If a field goal attempt is in flight toward the basket when the horn sounds ending a 
period, and it subsequently is touched by: (a) a defensive player, the goal, if successful, 
shall count; or (b) an offensive player, the period has ended.
(4)	If a timeout request is made as time expires for a period, the period ends and the 
timeout shall not be granted.
(5)	If there is a foul called on or by a player in the act of shooting the period will end 
after the foul is penalized. (See Rule 13, Section II(b)(ii)).
b.	 If the ball is dead and the game clock shows :00.0, the period has ended even 
though the horn may not have sounded.
EXCEPTION: See Rule 13, Section II(b)(ii)
Section IV—Tie Score—Overtime
If the score is tied at the end of the fourth period, play shall resume in 2:30 without change 
of baskets for any of the overtime periods required.
Section V—Stoppage of Timing Devices
a.	 The timing devices shall be stopped whenever the official’s whistle sounds.
b.	 The timing devices shall be stopped:
(1)	During the last minute of the first, second, and third periods following a successful 
field goal attempt.
(2)	During the last two minutes of regulation play and last two minutes of overtime(s) 
following a successful field goal attempt.
c.	 Officials may not use official time to permit a player to change or repair equipment.
Section VI—Timeouts – Mandatory/Team
a.	 Each team is entitled to seven (7) charged timeouts during regulation play. Each 
team is limited to no more than four (4) timeouts in the fourth period. Each team will be 
limited to two (2) team timeouts after the later of (i) the three-minute mark of the fourth 
period or (ii) the conclusion of the second mandatory timeout of the fourth period.

b.	 In overtime periods, each team shall be allowed two (2) team timeouts. 
c.	 There must be two mandatory timeouts in each period.
If neither team has taken a timeout prior to 6:59 of the period, it shall be mandatory 
for the Official Scorer to take it at the first dead ball and charge it to the home team, or for a 
neutral site game, the second team named in the official schedule. If no subsequent timeouts 
are taken prior to 2:59, it shall be mandatory for the Official Scorer to take it and charge it to 
the team not previously charged.
The Official Scorer shall notify a team when it has been charged with a mandatory 
time-out.
Mandatory timeouts shall be 2:45 for local games and 3:15 for national games. Any 
additional team timeouts in a period beyond those which are mandatory shall be 1:15. No 
mandatory timeout may be charged during an official’s suspension-of-play.
EXCEPTION: Suspension-of-play for Infection Control. See Comments on the Rules, 
Section II(N).
d.	 A request for a timeout by a player in the game or the head coach shall be granted 
only when the ball is dead or in control of a player on the team making the request. A 
request at any other time shall be ignored.
e.	 During a timeout, all substitutions are legal for both teams.
f.	 This rule may be used for any reason, including a request for a rule interpretation. If 
the correction is sustained, no timeout shall be charged.
g.	 If a timeout is charged to the offensive team during the last two minutes of the fourth 
period and/or last two minutes of any overtime period and (1) the ball is out-of-bounds in the 
backcourt (except for a suspension of play after the team had advanced the ball), or (2) after 
securing the ball from a rebound in the backcourt and prior to any advance of the ball, or (3) 
after the offensive team secures the ball from a change of possession in the backcourt and 
prior to any advance of the ball, the timeout should be granted. Upon resumption of play, 
the team granted the timeout shall have the option of putting the ball into play at the 28’ hash 
mark in the frontcourt or at the designated spot out-of-bounds. If the ball is put into play at the 
hash mark, the ball may be passed into either the frontcourt or backcourt. If it is passed into 
the backcourt, the team will receive a new 8-second count.
However, once the ball is (1) thrown in from out-of-bounds, or (2) dribbled or passed 
after receiving it from a rebound or a change of possession, the timeout shall be granted, 
and, upon resumption of play, the ball shall be in-bounded on the sideline where play was 
interrupted. In order for the option to be available following these conditions, a second timeout 
must be granted to the offensive team.
The time on the game clock and the shot clock shall remain as when the timeout was called.
h.	 A timeout shall not be granted to the defensive team during an official’s suspension- 
of-play.
EXCEPTION: Suspension of play for Infection Control. See Comments on the Rules, 
Section II(N).
i.	 If a player is injured as a result of a player on the opposing team committing a 
flagrant foul or unsportsmanlike act, play will resume when playing conditions are safe and 
no timeout will be charged, unless a mandatory is due, as a result of any delay due to 
the player’s injury.
j.	 If a team calls a timeout because one of its players is injured and, at the expiration 
of the timeout play is unable to resume due to that player’s injury, play will resume when 
playing conditions are safe.

k.	 Requests for a timeout in excess of those available to the team at that point in the 
game (as set forth in subsection (a)) shall be granted and a technical foul shall be assessed. 
Following the timeout, the ball will be awarded to the opposing team and play shall resume 
with a throw-in nearest the spot where play was interrupted.
l.	 If a team has no timeouts remaining and a player is injured and cannot be removed 
from the playing court during a stoppage of play, no excessive timeout will be charged and 
play will resume when playing conditions are safe.
Section VII—Timeout Requests
a.	 If an official, upon receiving a timeout request by the defensive team, inadvertently 
signals while the play is in progress, play shall be suspended and the team in possession shall 
put the ball in play immediately at the sideline nearest where the ball was when the signal 
was given. The game and shot clock shall remain the same.
b.	 If an official, upon receiving a timeout request from the defensive team, inadvertently 
signals for a timeout during the act of shooting but prior to the release of the ball on:
(1) a successful field goal or free throw attempt, the point(s) shall be scored; (2) an 
unsuccessful field goal attempt, the offensive team shall put the ball in play immediately at 
the sideline nearest where the ball was when the signal was given; (3) an unsuccessful free 
throw attempt, the official shall rule disconcerting and award a substitute free throw.
c.	 If an official, upon receiving a timeout request, inadvertently signals for a timeout:
(1) after the ball is released during a successful field goal or free throw attempt, the points 
shall be scored, or (2) while the ball is loose or after the ball is released during an unsuccessful 
field goal or free throw attempt which will remain in play, play shall be resumed with a jump 
ball at the center circle between any two opponents in the game (except that, if a team would 
have imminently gained possession of the ball at the time of the stoppage, such team would 
be awarded possession pursuant to Rule 4, Section XIV).
d.	 When a team is granted a timeout, play shall not resume until the Time-out Clock 
has expired. The throw-in shall be nearest the spot where play was suspended. The throw-in 
shall be on the sideline, if the ball was in play when the request was granted.
e.	 A player shall not be granted any timeout if both of his feet are in the air and any 
part of his body has broken the vertical plane of the boundary line. This rule also applies to 
the midcourt line except during throw-ins in the last two minutes of the fourth or last two 
minutes of any overtime period.
f.	 A timeout can be granted only at the time of the request.
Section VIII—Time-In
a.	 After time has been out, the game clock shall be started:
(1)	On a free throw that is unsuccessful and the ball continues in play, the game clock 
shall be started when the missed free throw is legally touched by any player.
(2)	If play is resumed by a throw-in from out-of-bounds, the game clock shall be started 
when the ball is legally touched by any player within the playing area of the court.
(3)	If play is resumed with a jump ball, the game clock shall be started when the ball 
is legally tapped.

RULE NO. 6—PUTTING BALL IN PLAY—LIVE/DEAD BALL
Section I—Start of Games/Periods and Others
a.	 The game and overtimes shall be started with a jump ball in the center circle.
b.	 The team which gains first possession of the game will put the ball into play at their 
opponent’s endline to begin the fourth period. The other team will put the ball into play at 
their opponent’s endline at the beginning of the second and third periods.
c.	 In putting the ball into play following a successful free throw, field goal, or at the 
start of a period, the thrower-in may run along the endline or pass it to a teammate who is 
also out-of-bounds at the endline.
d.	 After any dead ball, play shall be resumed by a jump ball, a throw-in, or a free throw.
e.	 On the following infractions, the ball shall be awarded to the opposing team out-of-
bounds on the nearest sideline at the free throw line extended:
(1)	Three-seconds (offensive)
(2)	Ball entering basket from below
(3)	Illegal assist in scoring
(4)	Punching foul
(5)	Free throw violation by the offensive team
(6)	Flagrant foul-penalty (1) or (2)
(7)	Defensive three-seconds (offensive team retains possession)
(8)	Jump ball violation at free throw circle
(9)	Ball passing directly behind backboard
(10)	Offensive basket interference
(11)	Ball hitting horizontal basket support
(12)	Loose ball fouls which occur inside the free throw line extended
(13)	Five second back-to-the-basket violation
f.	 On the following infractions, the ball shall be awarded to the opposing team on the 
baseline at the nearest spot outside the three-second area extended:
(1)	Ball out-of-bounds on baseline
(2)	Ball hitting vertical basket support
(3)	Defensive goaltending (all privileges remain)
(4)	During a throw-in violation on the baseline
g.	 On the following infractions, the ball shall be awarded to the opposing team on the 
sideline at the nearest spot but no nearer to the baseline than the free throw line extended:
(1)	Traveling
(2)	Dribbling violations
(3)	Striking or kicking the ball on any situation except a throw-in
(4)	Swinging of elbows
(5)	Shot clock violation
(6)	Offensive screen set out-of-bounds
(7)	Offensive player illegally out-of-bounds

h.	 If the ball is kicked or punched during any throw-in, the ball will be returned to the 
original throw-in spot with all privileges, if any, remaining.
i.	 On any play where the ball goes out-of-bounds on the sideline, the ball shall be 
awarded to the opposing team at that spot.
j.	 Following a timeout that was called while the ball was alive, the ball shall be 
awarded out-of-bounds on the sideline at the nearest spot upon resumption of play. For all 
other timeouts, play shall resume where it was interrupted.
EXCEPTION: Rule 5, Section VI(g)
k.	 On a violation which requires putting the ball in play in the backcourt, the official 
will give the ball to the offensive player as soon as he is in a position out-of-bounds and 
ready to accept the ball.
EXCEPTION: In the last two minutes of each period or last two minutes of overtime, a 
reasonable amount of time shall be allowed for a substitution.
Section II—Live Ball
a.	 The ball becomes live when:
(1)	It is tossed by an official on any jump ball
(2)	It is at the disposal of the offensive player for a throw-in
(3)	It is placed at the disposal of a free throw shooter
Section III—Ball is Alive
a.	 The ball becomes alive when:
(1)	It is legally tapped by one of the participants of a jump ball
(2)	It is released by the thrower-in
(3)	It is released by the free throw shooter on a free throw which will remain in play
Section IV—Dead Ball
a.	 The ball becomes dead and/or remains dead when the following occurs:
(1)	Official blows his/her whistle
(2)	Free throw which will not remain in play (free throw which will be followed by 
another free throw, technical, flagrant, etc.)
(3)	Following a successful field goal or free throw that will remain in play, until 
player possession out-of-bounds. Contact which is NOT considered unsportsmanlike 
or unnecessary shall be ignored. (Rule 12A, Section V(i))
(4)	Time expires for the end of any period
EXCEPTION: If a field goal attempt is in flight, the ball becomes dead when the goal is 
made, missed, or touched by an offensive player.
Section V—Jump Balls in Center Circle
a.	 The ball shall be put into play in the center circle by a jump ball between any 
two opponents:
(1)	At the start of the game
(2)	At the start of each overtime period

(3)	A double free throw violation
(4)	Double foul during a loose ball
(5)	The ball becomes dead when neither team is in control and no field goal or 
infraction is involved
(6)	The ball comes to rest on the basket flange or becomes lodged between the 
basket ring and the backboard
(7)	A double foul which occurs as a result of a difference in opinion between officials
(8)	A suspension of play occurs during a loose ball (except that, if a team would have 
imminently gained possession of the ball at the time of the stoppage, such team would 
be awarded possession pursuant to Rule 4, Section XIV)
(9)	A fighting foul occurs during a loose ball
(10)	The officials are in doubt as to which team last touched the ball before going 
out-of-bounds and the players cannot be identified.
b.	 In all cases above, the jump ball shall be between any two opponents in the game 
at that time. If injury, ejection, or disqualification makes it necessary for any player to be 
replaced, his substitute may not participate in the jump ball.
Section VI—Other Jump Balls
a.	 The ball shall be put into play by a jump ball at the circle which is closest to the spot 
where:
(1)	A held ball occurs
(2)	A ball out-of-bounds caused by both teams occurs
(3)	An official is in doubt as to who last touched the ball
b.	 The jump ball shall be between the two involved players unless injury or ejection 
precludes one of the jumpers from participation. If the injured player must leave the game or is 
ejected, the coach of the opposing team shall select from his opponent’s bench a player who 
will replace the injured or ejected player. The injured player will not be permitted to reenter 
the game. If a player is removed for a concussion evaluation, his coach shall select one of the 
four remaining players in the game to participate in the jump and may return to the game if he 
completes the evaluation pursuant to the NBA Concussion Policy, and is deemed not to have 
a concussion.
Section VII—Restrictions Governing Jump Balls
a.	 Each jumper must have at least one foot on or inside that half of the jumping circle 
which is farthest from his own basket. Each jumper must have both feet within the 
restraining circle.
b.	 The ball must be tapped by one or both of the players participating in the jump ball 
after it reaches its highest point. If the ball falls to the floor without being tapped by at least 
one of the jumpers, one of the officials off the ball shall whistle the ball dead and signal 
another toss.
c.	 Neither jumper may tap the tossed ball before it reaches its highest point.
d.	 Neither jumper may leave his half of the jumping circle until the ball has been tapped.
e.	 Neither jumper may catch the tossed or tapped ball until it touches one of the eight 
non-jumpers, the floor, the basket, or the backboard.
f.	 Neither jumper is permitted to tap the ball more than twice on any jump ball.

g.	 The eight non-jumpers will remain outside the restraining circle until the ball has 
been tapped. Teammates may not occupy adjacent positions around the restraining circle if 
an opponent desires one of the positions. No player may position himself immediately 
behind an opponent on the restraining circle.
Penalty for c., d., e., f., g.: Ball awarded out-of-bounds to the opponent.
h.	 Player position on the restraining circle is determined by the direction of a player’s 
basket. The player whose basket is nearest shall have first choice of position, with positions 
being alternated thereafter.
RULE NO. 7—SHOT CLOCK
Section I—Definition
The “shot clock” refers to the timing device that displays a countdown of the time within 
which the team possessing the ball must attempt a field goal. The shot clock shall start at 24 
seconds unless otherwise provided in Rule 7. The shot clock shall be displayed in seconds, 
except tenths of seconds will also be displayed once the shot clock reaches 4.9 seconds.
Section II—Starting and Stopping of Shot Clock
a.	 The shot clock will start when a team gains new possession of a ball which is in play.
b.	 On a throw-in, the shot clock shall start when the ball is legally touched on the 
court by a player.
c.	 Following a jump ball or missed free throw, the shot clock shall start when new 
possession is obtained.
d.	 After gaining possession of the ball, a team must attempt a field goal before the 
shot clock expires. To constitute a legal field goal attempt, the following conditions must be 
complied with:
(1)	The ball must leave the player’s hand prior to the expiration of the shot clock.
(2)	After leaving the player’s hand(s), the ball must make contact with the basket ring.
e.	 A team is considered in possession of the ball when holding, passing, or dribbling. 
The team is considered in possession of the ball even though the ball has been batted away 
but the opponent has not gained possession. (See also Rule 4, Section XVII.) Additional rules 
regarding team possession following a suspension of play are set forth in Rule 4, Section XIV.
f.	 Team possession ends when:
(1)	The ball hits the rim of the offensive team
(2)	The opponent gains possession
g.	 If a ball is touched by a defensive player who does not gain possession of the ball, 
the shot clock shall continue to run.
h.	 If a defensive player is the last to touch the ball before going out-of-bounds or 
entering the basket ring from below, the shot clock is stopped and the offensive team shall 
be awarded the ball.
The offensive team shall have only the unexpired time remaining on the shot clock in 
which to attempt a field goal. If the shot clock reads 0, a shot clock violation has occurred, 
even though the horn may not have sounded.
i.	 If during any period there are 24 seconds OR LESS left to play in the period, the 
shot clock shall not function following a change of possession; provided, however, the shot 
clock shall be reactivated and reset to 14 seconds when any of the situations described in 
Section IV(d) below occur.

j.	 If an official inadvertently blows his/her whistle and the shot clock buzzer sounds 
while the ball is in the air, play shall be suspended and play resumed by a jump ball between 
any two opponents at the center circle, if the shot hits the rim and is unsuccessful (except that, 
if a team would have imminently gained possession of the ball at the time of the stoppage, 
such team would be awarded possession pursuant to Rule 4, Section XIV). If the shot does 
not hit the rim, a shot clock violation has occurred. If the shot is successful, the goal shall 
count and the ball inbounded as after any successful field goal. It should be noted that even 
though the official blows his/her whistle, all provisions of the above rule apply.
k.	 If there is a question whether or not an attempt to score has been before the shot clock 
expires, the final decision shall be made by the officials. See Rule 13, Section I(a)(7).
l.	 Whenever the shot clock reads 0 and the ball is dead for any reason other than a 
defensive three-second violation, flopping violation, kicking violation, punched ball violation, 
personal foul or a technical foul by the defensive team, a shot clock violation has occurred.
Section III—Putting Ball In Play After Violation
If a team fails to attempt a field goal within the time allotted, a shot clock violation shall 
be called. The ball shall be awarded to the opposing team on the sideline at the nearest spot but 
no nearer to the baseline than the free throw line extended. 
Section IV—Resetting Shot Clock
a.	 The shot clock shall be reset when a special situation occurs which warrants such action.
b.	 The shot clock is never reset on the following:
(1)	Defensive player is the last to touch the ball before going out-of-bounds or entering 
the basket ring from below
(2)	Technical fouls or delay-of-game warning on the offensive team
(3)	Jump ball is retossed as a result of a poor toss, double violation, or correctable error
(4)	Suspension-of-play (except for infection control)
(5)	Field goal attempt which fails to touch the rim
(6)	Jump balls which are the result of a held ball caused by the defense
c.	 The shot clock shall be reset to 24 seconds anytime the following occurs:
(1)	Change of possession from one team to another
(2)	Personal foul where ball is being inbounded in backcourt
(3)	Violation where ball is being inbounded in backcourt
(4)	Jump balls which are not the result of a held ball caused by the defense
(5)	All flagrant and punching fouls
d.	 The shot clock shall be reset to 14 seconds anytime the following occurs:  
(1)	The offensive team is the first to gain possession after an unsuccessful free throw 
that remains in play, or an unsuccessful field goal attempt that contacts the basket ring
(2)	A loose ball foul is called on the defensive team in the sequence immediately 
following an unsuccessful free throw that remains in play, or an unsuccessful field goal 
attempt that contacts the basket ring; provided that, as a result of the foul, the offensive 
team inbounds the ball in the frontcourt 
NOTE: If, as a result of a defensive foul, the offensive team inbounds the ball in the 
backcourt, Rule 7, Section IV(c)(2) applies 
(3)	The offensive team retains possession after the ball goes out-of-bounds in the
sequence immediately following an unsuccessful free throw that remains in play, or an 
unsuccessful field goal attempt that contacts the basket ring

For purposes of Rule 7, Section IV(d) only, an “unsuccessful field goal attempt 
that contacts the basket ring” shall include any live ball from the playing court that 
contacts the basket ring of the team which is in possession.  
e.	 The shot clock shall remain the same as when play was interrupted or reset to 14 
seconds, whichever is greater, anytime the following occurs:
(1)	Personal foul by the defense where ball is being inbounded in frontcourt 
EXCEPTION:  Rule 7, Section IV(d)(2)
(2)	Defensive three-second violation
(3)	Technical fouls and/or delay-of-game warnings on the defensive team
(4)	Kicked or punched ball by the defensive team with the ball being inbounded in 
the offensive team’s frontcourt
(5)	Infection control
(6)	Jump balls retained by the offensive team as the result of any violation by the 
defensive team during a jump ball which results in a frontcourt throw-in
RULE NO. 8—OUT-OF-BOUNDS AND THROW-IN
Section I—Player
The player is out-of-bounds when he touches the floor or any object on or outside a 
boundary. For location of a player in the air, his position is that from which he last touched 
the floor. The last part of the foot/feet which is in contact with the floor on his last step prior 
to jumping over the midcourt line or three-point line shall determine his location.
Section II—Ball
a.	 The ball is out-of-bounds when it touches a player who is out-of-bounds or any 
other person, the floor, or any object on, above, or outside of a boundary or the supports or 
back of the backboard.
b.	 Any ball that rebounds or passes directly behind the backboard, in any direction, or 
enters the cylinder from below is considered out-of-bounds.
c.	 The ball is caused to go out-of-bounds by the last player to touch it (including by 
touching the player’s hair or uniform) before it goes out, provided it is out-of-bounds because 
of touching something other than a player. If the ball is out-of-bounds because of touching 
a player who is on or outside a boundary, such player caused it to go out. If a player has his 
hand in contact with the ball and an opponent hits that part of the hand causing the ball to go 
out-of-bounds, the team whose player had his hand on the ball will retain possession.
d.	 If the ball goes out-of-bounds and was last touched simultaneously by two 
opponents, both of whom are inbounds or out-of-bounds, or if the official is in doubt as to 
who last touched the ball, or if the officials disagree, play shall be resumed by a jump ball 
between the two involved players in the nearest restraining circle.
EXCEPTION: Rule 6, Section V(a)(10) and Rule 6, Section VI(a)(3)
e.	 If the ball is interfered with by an opponent seated on the bench or standing on the 
sideline (Rule 12A, Section II(a)(7)), it shall be awarded to the offended team out-of- bounds 
nearest the spot of the violation.
Section III—The Throw-In
a.	 The throw-in starts when the ball is given to the player entitled to the throw-in. He 
shall release the ball within 5 seconds from the time he receives the ball and controls it. Until 
the passed ball has crossed the plane of the boundary, no player shall have any part of his 
person over the boundary line and teammates shall not occupy positions parallel or adjacent

to the baseline if an opponent desires one of those positions. The defensive man shall have 
the right to be between his man and the basket.
b.	 On a throw-in which goes out-of-bounds and is not touched by a player in the game, 
the ball is returned to the original throw-in spot.
c.	 After a score, field goal, or free throw, the latter coming as the result of a personal 
foul, any player of the team not credited with the score shall put the ball into play from any 
point out-of-bounds at the endline of the court where the point(s) were scored. He may pass 
the ball to a teammate behind the endline; however, the five-second throw-in rule applies. 
This rule also applies to the player of the team with possession at the start of the second, 
third, and fourth periods.
d.	 After a free throw violation by the shooter or his teammate, the throw-in is made 
from out-of-bounds on either side of the free throw line extended.
e.	 Any ball out-of-bounds in a team’s frontcourt or at the midcourt line cannot be 
passed into the backcourt. On all backcourt and midcourt violations, the ball shall be awarded 
to the opposing team at the midcourt line, and must be passed into the frontcourt.
EXCEPTION: During the last two minutes of the fourth period and the last two minutes 
of any overtime period, the ball may be passed anywhere (frontcourt or backcourt) on the 
court. However, if the ball is thrown into the frontcourt and an offensive player on the court 
fails to control the ball and causes it to go into the backcourt, his team may not be the first 
to touch the ball.
f.	 A throw-in which touches the floor, or any object, on or outside the boundary line, 
or touches anything above the playing surface is a violation. The ball must be thrown directly 
inbounds.
EXCEPTION: Rule 8, Section III(c)
PENALTY: Violation of this rule is loss of possession, and the ball must be inbounded at 
the original throw-in spot.
RULE NO. 9—FREE THROWS AND PENALTIES
Section I—Positions and Violations
a.	 When a free throw is awarded, an official shall put the ball in play by delivering it 
to the free throw shooter. The shooter shall be above the free throw line and within the upper 
half of the free throw circle. He shall attempt the free throw within 10 seconds of controlling 
the ball in such a way that the ball enters the basket or touches the ring.
PENALTY:
If there is a violation and the free throw attempt is to remain in play, the opposing 
team shall inbound on either sideline at the free throw line extended. If both teams commit a 
violation during this free throw, a jump ball shall be administered at midcourt between any two 
opponents in the game. If the opponent’s violation is disconcertion, then a substitute free 
throw shall be awarded.
If there is a violation and the free throw attempt is not to remain in play, then play will 
continue from that point. If an opponent also commits a violation (double violation), then 
play will also continue from that point. If the opponent’s violation is disconcertion, then a 
substitute free throw shall be awarded.
b.	 The free throw shooter may not step over the plane of the free throw line until the 
ball touches the basket ring, backboard, or the free throw ends.
PENALTY:
This is a violation by the shooter on all free throw attempts and no point can be scored.
If there is a violation and the free throw attempt is to remain in play, the opposing team

shall inbound on either sideline at the free throw line extended. If both teams commit a 
violation during this free throw, a jump ball shall be administered at midcourt between any 
two opponents in the game.
If there is a violation and the free throw attempt is not to remain in play, then play will 
continue from that point. If an opponent also commits a violation (double violation), then 
play will also continue from that point.
c.	 The free throw shooter shall not purposely fake a free throw attempt. 
PENALTY:
This is a violation by the shooter on all free throw attempts and a double violation should 
not be called if an opponent violates any free throw rules.
If the free throw attempt is to remain in play, the opposing team shall inbound on either 
sideline at the free throw line extended.
If the free throw attempt is not to remain in play, then play will continue from that point.
d.	 During a free throw attempt for a common foul, each of the spaces nearest the end- 
line must be occupied by an opponent of the free throw shooter. Teammates of the free throw 
shooter must occupy the next adjacent spaces on each side. Only one of the third spaces may 
be occupied by an opponent of the free throw shooter. It is not mandatory that either of the 
third spaces be occupied by an opponent but may not be occupied by a teammate. If there is a 
discrepancy, teammates of the free throw shooter will occupy the spaces first.
Players occupying lane spaces may not extend themselves over their lane spaces in front 
of an opponent or be touching the lane line or floor inside the line when the ball is released 
by the shooter. They may not vacate their lane space more than 3’ from the lane line before 
the ball is released.
Players not occupying lane spaces must remain on the court behind the three point line 
above the free throw line extended and may not be touching the line or floor inside the line 
when the ball is released.
PENALTY:
If the free throw attempt is to remain in play and a teammate of the shooter violates, no 
point can be scored and the opposing team will inbound on either sideline at the free throw 
line extended. If an opponent violates, the shooter shall receive a substitute free throw if 
his attempt is unsuccessful but shall be ignored if the attempt is successful. If a teammate 
and opponent both violate, a jump ball shall be administered at midcourt between any two 
opponents in the game.
If the free throw attempt is not to remain in play, no violation can occur regardless of 
which player or players violate since no advantage is gained unless there is a disconcertion 
violation by an opponent to which a substitute free throw will be awarded.
e.	 If the ball is to become dead after the last free throw attempt, players shall not 
occupy positions along the free throw lanes. All players must remain on the court behind the 
three point line above the free throw line extended until the ball is released.
PENALTY:
No violations can occur regardless of which player or players violate since no 
advantage is gained unless there is a disconcertion violation by an opponent to which a 
substitute free throw will be awarded.
f.	 During all free throw attempts, no opponent in the game shall disconcert the shooter 
once the ball is placed at his disposal. The following are acts of disconcertion:
(1)	Raising his arms when positioned on the lane line on a free throw which will not 
remain in play,
(2)	Waving his arms or making a sudden movement when in the visual field of the 
shooter during any free throw attempt,

(3)	Talking to the free throw shooter or talking in a loud disruptive manner during any 
free throw attempt.
(4)	Entering the lane and continuing to move during any free throw attempt. 
PENALTY:
No penalty is assessed if the free throw is successful. A substitute free throw will be 
administered if the attempt is unsuccessful.
g.	 A player shall not touch the ball or the basket ring when the ball is using the basket 
ring as its lower base nor touch the ball while it is in the imaginary cylinder above the ring 
after touching the basket ring or backboard.
PENALTY:
If the free throw attempt is to remain in play and a teammate of the shooter violates, no 
point can be scored and the opposing team will inbound on either sideline at the free throw 
line extended. If an opponent violates, one point shall be scored and play will continue as 
after any successful free throw with the official administering the throw-in.
If the free throw attempt is not to remain in play, no point can be scored if the violation 
is by a teammate and the shooter will attempt his next free throw. One point shall be scored 
if the violation is by an opponent and the shooter will attempt his next free throw.
h.	 No player shall touch the ball before it touches the basket ring or backboard. 
PENALTY:
If the free throw attempt is to remain in play and a teammate of the shooter violates, no 
point can be scored and the opposing team will inbound on either sideline at the free throw 
line extended. If an opponent violates, one point shall be scored and an additional free throw 
shall be awarded the same shooter.
If the free throw attempt is not to remain in play, no point can be scored if the violation 
is by a teammate and the shooter will attempt his next free throw. One point shall be scored 
if the violation is by an opponent and the shooter will attempt his next free throw.
i.	 During all free throw attempts, if an official suspends play before the free throw 
attempt is released, no violations can occur.
Section II—Shooting of Free Throw
a.	 The free throw(s) awarded because of a personal foul shall be attempted by the 
offended player.
EXCEPTIONS:
(1)	If the offended player is injured, other than as a result of a flagrant foul or 
unsportsmanlike conduct, or is ejected from the game and cannot attempt the awarded 
free throw(s), the opposing coach shall select, from his opponent’s bench, the 
replacement player. That player will attempt the free throw(s) and the injured player 
will not be permitted to re-enter the game. The substitute must remain in the game 
until the ball is legally touched by a player on the court.
EXCEPTION: Rule 3, Section V(e)
(2)	If the offended player is injured and unable to attempt the awarded free throw(s) as 
a result of a flagrant foul-penalty (1) and/or as a result of a medical determination that 
a player must undergo a concussion evaluation, his coach may designate any player 
in the game at that time to attempt the free throw(s). The injured player will not be 
permitted to re-enter the game; except that the player will be permitted to reenter if he 
was removed for a concussion evaluation, completed the evaluation required pursuant 
to the NBA Concussion Policy, and is deemed not to have a concussion.
(3)	If the offended player is injured and unable to attempt the awarded free throw(s) 
due to any unsportsmanlike act, his coach may designate any eligible member of the

squad to attempt the free throw(s). The injured player will be permitted to reenter 
the game.
(4)	If the offended player is disqualified and unable to attempt the awarded free 
throw(s), his coach shall designate an eligible substitute from the bench. That 
substitute will attempt the free throw(s) and cannot be removed until the ball is legally 
touched by a player on the court.
EXCEPTION: Rule 3, Section V(e)
(5)	Away-from-the-play foul—Rule 12B, Section X(a)(1).
(6)	Transition Take Foul—Rule 12B, Section XI(a).
b.	 A free throw attempt, personal or technical, shall be illegal if an official does not 
handle the ball.
c.	 If multiple free throws are awarded, all those which remain must be attempted, if 
the first and/or second attempt is nullified by an offensive player’s violation.
d.	 If a timeout is granted prior to a free throw attempt, the free throw will be attempted 
following the timeout.
Section III—Next Play
After a successful free throw which is not followed by another free throw, the ball shall 
be put into play by a throw-in, as after any successful field goal.
EXCEPTION: After a free throw for a foul which occurs during a dead ball which 
immediately precedes any period, the ball shall be put into play by the team entitled to the 
throw-in in the period which follows. (See Rule 6, Section I(b)). This includes flagrant and 
punching fouls.
RULE NO. 10—VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Section I—Out-of-Bounds
a.	 A player shall not be the last to touch the ball before it goes out-of-bounds.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team at the boundary line 
nearest the spot of the violation.
EXCEPTION: On a throw-in which goes out-of-bounds and is not touched by a player 
in the game, the ball is returned to the original throw-in spot.
Section II—Dribble
a.	 A player shall not run with the ball without dribbling it.
b.	 A player in control of a dribble who steps on or outside a boundary line, even though 
not touching the ball while on or outside that boundary line, shall not be allowed to return 
inbounds and continue his dribble. He may not even be the first player to touch the ball after he 
has re-established a position inbounds.
c.	 A player may not dribble a second time after he has voluntarily ended his first dribble.
d.	 A player who is dribbling may not put any part of his hand under the ball and (1) carry 
it from one point to another or (2) bring it to a pause and then continue to dribble again.
e.	 A player may dribble a second time if he lost control of the ball because of:
(1)	A field goal attempt at his basket, provided the ball touches the backboard or 
basket ring
(2)	An opponent touching the ball
(3)	A pass or fumble which touches his backboard, basket ring, or is touched by 
another player.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. Ball is awarded to the opposing team on the sideline nearest 
the spot of the violation but no nearer the baseline than the foul line extended.

Section III—Thrower-in
A thrower-in shall not (1) carry the ball onto the court; (2) fail to release the ball within 5 
seconds; (3) touch it on the court before it has touched another player; (4) leave the designated 
throw-in spot which is one step to his left or right; (5) throw the ball so that it enters the 
basket before touching anyone on the court; (6) step on the court over the boundary line before 
the ball is released; (7) throw the ball out-of-bounds without it being touched by a player 
in the game; (8) exit the playing surface to gain an advantage on a throw-in; (9) hand the ball 
to a player on the court.
EXCEPTION: After a field goal or free throw as a result of a personal foul or the start 
of a period, the thrower-in may run the end line or pass to a teammate behind the end line.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team at the original spot of 
the throw-in.
Section IV—Strike the Ball
a.	 A player shall not kick the ball or strike it with the fist.
b.	 Kicking the ball or striking it with any part of the leg is a violation when it is an 
intentional act. The ball accidentally striking the foot, the leg, or fist is not a violation. A player 
may not use any part of his leg to intentionally move or secure the ball.
PENALTY:
(1)	If the violation is by the offense, the ball is awarded to the opposing team on the 
sideline nearest the spot of the violation but no nearer to the baseline than the free 
throw line extended.
(2)	If the violation is by the defense while the ball is in play, the offensive team 
retains possession of the ball on the sideline nearest the spot of the violation but no 
nearer the baseline than the foul line extended.
(3)	If the violation occurs during a throw-in, the opposing team retains possession at 
the spot of the original throw-in with all privileges, if any, remaining.
Section V—Jump Ball
a.	 A player shall not violate the jump ball rule (Rule 6, Section VII).
b.	 During a jump ball, a personal foul committed prior to either team obtaining 
possession, shall be ruled a “loose ball” foul.
If the violation or foul occurs prior to the ball being legally tapped, neither the game clock 
nor shot clock shall be started.
PENALTY:
(1)	In (a) above, the ball is awarded to the opposing team on the sideline nearest the 
spot of the violation.
(2)	In (a) above, if there is a violation by each team, or if the official makes a bad 
toss, the toss shall be repeated with the same jumpers.
(3)	In (b) above, free throws may or may not be awarded, consistent with whether 
the penalty is in effect (Rule 12B, Section VIII).
Section VI—Offensive Three-Second Rule
a.	 An offensive player shall not remain for more than three seconds in that part of his 
free throw lane between the endline and extended 4’ (imaginary) off the court and the farther 
edge of the free throw line while the ball is in control of his team.

b.	 Allowance may be made for a player who, having been in this area for less than 
three seconds, is in the act of shooting at the end of the third second. Under these conditions, 
the 3-second count is discontinued while his continuous motion is toward the basket. If that 
continuous motion ceases, the previous 3-second count is continued. This is also true if it 
is imminent the offensive player will exit this area.
c.	 The 3-second count shall not begin until the ball is in control in the offensive team’s 
frontcourt. No violation can occur if the ball is batted away by an opponent.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team on the sideline at the 
free throw line extended.
Section VII—Defensive Three-Second Rule
a.	 The count starts when the offensive team is in control of the ball in the frontcourt.
b.	 Any defensive player, who is positioned in the 16-foot lane or the area extending 
4 feet past the lane endline, must be actively guarding an opponent within three seconds. 
Actively guarding means being within arm’s length of an offensive player and in a guarding 
position.
c.	 Any defensive player may play any offensive player. The defenders may double-team 
any player.
d.	 The defensive three-second count is suspended when: (1) a player is in the act of 
shooting, (2) there is a loss of team control, (3) the defender is actively guarding an opponent, 
(4) the defender completely clears the 16-foot lane, or (5) it is imminent the defender will 
become legal.
e.	 If the defender is guarding the player with the ball, he may be located in the 16-foot 
lane. This defender is not required to be in an actively guarding/arms distance position. If 
another defender actively guards the player with the ball, the original defender must actively 
guard an opponent or exit the 16-foot lane. Once the offensive player passes the ball, the 
defender must actively guard an opponent or exit the 16-foot lane.
PENALTY: A technical foul shall be assessed. The offensive team retains possession on 
the sideline at the free throw line extended nearest the point of interruption. The shot clock shall 
remain the same as when play was interrupted or reset to 14 seconds, whichever is greater.
If a violation is whistled during a successful field goal attempt, the violation shall be 
ignored and play shall resume as after any successful basket.
Section VIII—Eight-Second Rule
A team shall not be in continuous possession of a ball which is in its backcourt for more 
than 8 consecutive seconds.
EXCEPTION (1): A new 8 seconds is awarded if the defense: (1) kicks or punches the 
ball, (2) is assessed a personal or technical foul, or (3) is issued a delay of game warning.
EXCEPTION (2): A new 8 seconds is awarded: (1) if play is suspended to administer 
Comments on the Rules, Section II(N) for Infection Control, (2) when a team gains control of 
a jump ball in the backcourt, or (3) during a frontcourt throw-in into the backcourt in the last 
two minutes of the fourth and last two minutes of any overtime period.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team at the midcourt line.
Section IX—Ball in Backcourt
a.	 A player shall not be the first to touch a ball which he or a teammate caused to go 
from frontcourt to backcourt while his team was in control of the ball.
EXCEPTION:  Rule 8, Section III(e)(EXCEPTION)

b.	 During a jump ball, a try for a goal, or a situation in which a player taps the ball 
away from a congested area, as during rebounding, in an attempt to get the ball out where 
player control may be secured, the ball is not in control of either team. Hence, the restriction 
on first touching does not apply.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team at the midcourt line.
Section X—Swinging of Elbows
A player shall not be allowed excessive and/or vigorous swinging of the elbows in 
swinging motion (no contact) when a defensive player is nearby and the offensive player has 
the ball.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team on the sideline, near- 
est the spot of the violation but no nearer the baseline than the foul line extended.
Section XI—Entering Basket From Below
A player shall not be the last to touch a ball which rises above the rim level within the 
cylinder from below.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team on the sideline at 
the free throw line extended.
Section XII—Illegal Assist in Scoring
a.	 A player may not assist himself in an attempt to score by using any part of the rim, 
net, backboard, or basket support to lift, hold, or raise himself.
b.	 A player may not assist a teammate to gain height while attempting to score.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team on the sideline at 
the free throw line extended.
Section XIII—Traveling
a.	 A player who receives the ball while standing still may pivot, using either foot as 
the pivot foot.
b.	 A player who gathers the ball while progressing may take (1) two steps in coming 
to a stop, passing, or shooting the ball, or (2) if he has not yet dribbled, one step prior 
to releasing the ball. A player who gathers the ball while dribbling may take two steps in 
coming to a stop, passing, or shooting the ball.
The first step occurs when a foot, or both feet, touch the floor after the player gathers 
the ball.
The second step occurs after the first step when the other foot touches the floor, or both 
feet touch the floor simultaneously.
A player who comes to a stop on step one when both feet are on the floor or touch the 
floor simultaneously may pivot using either foot as his pivot. If he jumps with both feet he 
must release the ball before either foot touches the floor.
A player who lands with one foot first may only pivot using that foot.
A progressing player who jumps off one foot on the first step may land with both feet 
simultaneously for the second step. In this situation, the player may not pivot with either foot 
and if one or both feet leave the floor the ball must be released before either returns to the floor.
c.	 In starting a dribble after (1) receiving the ball while standing still, or (2) coming to a 
legal stop, the ball must be out of the player’s hand before the pivot foot is raised off the floor.
d.	 If a player, with the ball in his possession, raises his pivot foot off the floor, he must 
pass or shoot before his pivot foot returns to the floor. If he drops the ball while in the air, he 
may not be the first to touch the ball.

e.	 A player who falls to the floor while holding the ball, or while coming to a stop, 
may not gain an advantage by sliding.
f.	 A player who attempts a field goal may not be the first to touch the ball if it fails to 
touch the backboard, basket ring, or another player.
g.	 A player may not be the first to touch his own pass unless the ball touches his back- 
board, basket ring, or another player.
h.	 Upon ending his dribble or gaining control of the ball, a player may not touch the 
floor consecutively with the same foot (hop).
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team on the sideline, near- 
est spot of the violation but no nearer the baseline than the foul line extended.
Section XIV—Offensive Screen Set Out-of-Bounds
An offensive player shall not leave the playing area of the floor on the endline in the 
frontcourt for the purpose of setting a screen.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team on the sideline at the 
point of interruption but no nearer to the baseline than the foul line extended.
Section XV—Offensive Player Out-of-Bounds
An offensive player shall not leave the playing area of the court without returning 
immediately and cannot repeatedly leave and re-enter the court.
EXCEPTION: (1) injury, (2) inbounding the ball on a throw-in, and (3) any other 
unusual circumstance.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team on the sideline at the 
point of interruption but no nearer to the baseline than the foul line extended.
Section XVI—Five-Second Back-to-the-Basket Violation
An offensive player in his frontcourt below the free throw line extended shall not be 
permitted to dribble with his back or side to the basket for more than five seconds.
The count ends when (1) the player picks up the ball, (2) dribbles above the free throw 
line extended, or (3) a defensive player deflects the ball away.
PENALTY: Loss of ball. The ball is awarded to the opposing team out-of-bounds on the 
nearest sideline at the free throw line extended. 
Section XVII—Flopping
a.	 A player may not commit a flop, which is (i) a reaction that is inconsistent with 
what is reasonable given the force, direction, or nature of another player’s action, whether 
or not such other player’s action resulted in contact, or (ii) any non-basketball action that is 
reasonably determined to be intended to cause the officials to call a foul on another player.
PENALTY/ADMINISTRATION: 
(1)	A technical foul shall be assessed at the next neutral opportunity.
(2)	After the penalty free throw, play shall resume on the sideline at the point of 
interruption (as defined in Rule 4, Section XIV), but no nearer to the baseline than the 
free throw line extended.

RULE NO. 11—BASKET INTERFERENCE—GOALTENDING
Section I—A Player Shall Not:
a.	 Touch the ball or the basket ring when the ball is sitting or rolling on the ring and 
using the basket ring as its lower base or hang on the rim while the ball is passing through.
EXCEPTION: If a player near his own basket has his hand legally in contact with the 
ball, it is not a violation if his contact with the ball continues after the ball enters the cylinder, 
or if, in such action, he touches the basket.
b.	 Touch any ball from within the playing area when it is above the basket ring and 
within the imaginary cylinder.
c.	 During a field goal attempt, touch a ball, which has a chance to score, after it has 
touched any part of the backboard above ring level, whether the ball is considered on its 
upward or downward flight.
d.	 During a field goal attempt, touch a ball, which has a chance to score, after it has 
touched the backboard below the ring level and while the ball is on its upward flight.
e.	 Trap the ball against the face of the backboard after it has been released. (To be a 
trapped ball, three elements must exist simultaneously. The hand, the ball, and the backboard 
must all occur at the same time. A batted ball against the backboard is not a trapped ball.)
f.	 Touch any ball from within the playing area that is on its downward flight with an 
opportunity to score. This is considered to be a “field goal attempt” or trying for a goal.
g.	 Touch the ball at any time with a hand which is through the basket ring.
h.	 Vibrate the rim, net, or backboard so as to cause the ball to make an unnatural 
bounce, or bend or move the rim to an off-center position when the ball is touching the ring 
or passing through.
i.	 Touch the rim, net, or ball while the ball is in the net, preventing it from clearing 
the basket.
PENALTY: If the violation is at the opponent’s basket, the offended team is awarded 
two points, if the attempt is from the two point zone and three points if it is from the three 
point zone. The crediting of the score and subsequent procedure is the same as if the 
awarded score has resulted from the ball having gone through the basket, except that the 
official shall hand the ball to a player of the team entitled to the throw-in. If the violation is 
at a team’s own basket, no points can be scored and the ball is awarded to the offended team 
at the free throw line extended on either sideline. If there is a violation by both teams, no 
points can be scored, and play shall be resumed by a jump ball between any two opponents in 
the game at the center circle.
RULE NO. 12—FOULS AND PENALTIES
A.   Technical Foul
Section I—Excessive Timeouts
a.	 Requests for a timeout in excess of the authorized number shall be granted and 
a technical foul shall be assessed. Following the timeout and free throw attempt, the ball will 
be awarded to the team which shot the free throw and play shall resume with a throw-in 
nearest the spot where play was interrupted.
b.	 If the excessive timeout is granted prior to free throw attempt(s), there will be no 
line-up for the remaining free throws and play shall resume with a throw-in at the point of 
interruption by the team which shot the technical foul.
c.	 If the excessive timeout is granted prior to a jump ball, the ball shall be awarded to 
the team shooting the technical foul at the point of interruption.

Section II—Delay-of-Game
a.	 A delay-of-game shall be called for:
(1)	Preventing the ball from being promptly put into play.
(2)	Interfering with the ball after a successful field goal or free throw.
(3)	Failing to immediately pass the ball to the nearest official when a personal foul 
or violation is assessed.
(4)	Touching the ball before the throw-in has been released.
(5)	A defender crossing the boundary line within the designated throw-in spot prior to 
the ball being released on a throw-in.
EXCEPTION (5): In the last two minutes of the fourth period and last two minutes 
of any overtime period, a technical foul will be assessed if the defender crosses or breaks the 
plane of the boundary line within the designated throw-in spot when an offensive player is in a 
position to inbound and prior to the ball being released on a throw-in.
(6)	A team preventing play from commencing at any time.
(7)	Any player, coach, or trainer interfering with a ball which has crossed the boundary 
line (Rule 8, Section II(e)).
(8)	A free throw shooter venturing fully beyond the three-point line between attempts.
(9)	A player entering the game when beckoned by an official with his shirt untucked.
PENALTY: The first offense is a warning. A technical foul shall be assessed with each 
successive offense and charged to the team. An announcement will be made by the public 
address announcer. The shot clock shall remain the same or reset to 14, whichever is greater, if 
the violation is assessed against the defensive team. The offensive team shall be awarded a new 
8 seconds to advance the ball if it is in the backcourt. There is no change in timing status if any 
of these violations are assessed against the offensive team. If repeated acts become a travesty, 
the head coach shall be notified that he is being held responsible.
Section III—Number of Players
a.	 If the ball is put into play and remains in play with one team having six or more 
players on the court, a non-unsportsmanlike technical foul will be assessed on the team with 
too many players and such team would lose possession if it had possession at the time the 
violation was discovered. Immediately following the free throw awarded for the technical 
foul, the team with the correct number of players will instruct the Crew Chief to:
(1)	resume play from the point in time when the technical foul was assessed, under 
the same conditions as would have prevailed had there been no error with a throw-in, jump 
ball, or foul shot, as appropriate. If the ball is to be put into play with a throw-in, the 
team who shot the free throw will be awarded possession unless that team just scored 
and the error was discovered prior to the throw-in being released by the team with six 
or more players.
(2)	nullify all play that occurred from the point in time when the ball was put into 
play with one team having six or more players on the court and ending when the technical 
foul was assessed, reset the game and shot clock to the point in time when the ball was put 
into play, and if the ball was put into play by:
(i)	 a throw-in, the ball shall be returned to the original throw-in spot with the ball 
awarded to the team with the correct number of players, or
(ii)	 a missed free throw that remained in play, a jump ball shall be held at center 
court between any two players in the game, or
(iii)	a jump ball, the ball shall be returned to the original jump ball spot and a jump 
ball held with the same two players.
EXCEPTION: Acts of unsportsmanlike conduct and all flagrant fouls, and points scored 
from any resulting free throws, shall not be nullified.

b.	 Other errors involving the wrong number of players at the start of play, four or less, 
will be penalized with a non-unsportsmanlike technical foul and play shall resume from the 
point-of-interruption.
EXCEPTION to a and b: If the violation occurs on (1) a free throw attempt which is to 
be followed by another free throw attempt, or (2) a free throw attempt that is not going to 
remain in play, (3) throw-in before the ball is released, (4) prior to a personal foul being 
assessed, or (5) jump ball before the ball is released.
Section IV—Basket Ring, Backboard, or Support
a.	 An offensive player who deliberately hangs on his basket ring, net, backboard, or 
support during the game shall be assessed a non-unsportsmanlike technical foul.
b.	 A defensive player who deliberately gains or maintains height or hangs on his 
opponent’s basket ring, net, backboard or support shall be assessed a non-unsportsmanlike
technical foul. If he touches the ball during a field goal attempt, points shall be awarded 
consistent with the type of shot.
EXCEPTION: An offensive or defensive player may hang on the basket ring, backboard, 
or support to prevent an injury to himself or another player, with no technical foul assessed.
c.	 Should a defensive player deliberately hang on the basket ring, net, backboard, 
or support to successfully touch a ball which is in possession of an opponent, a non-
unsportsmanlike technical foul shall be assessed.
Section V—Conduct
a.	 An official may assess a technical foul, without prior warning, at any time. A technical 
foul(s) may be assessed to any player on the court or anyone seated on the bench for conduct 
which, in the opinion of an official, is detrimental to the game. The technical foul must be 
charged to an individual. A technical foul cannot be assessed for physical contact when the ball 
is alive.
EXCEPTION: Fighting fouls and/or taunting with physical contact.
b.	 A maximum of two technical fouls for unsportsmanlike acts may be assessed any 
player, coach, trainer, or other team bench person. Any of these offenders may be ejected 
for committing only one unsportsmanlike act, and they must be ejected for committing two 
unsportsmanlike acts.
c.	 A technical foul called for (1) delay of game, (2) coaches box violations, (3) defensive 
3-seconds, (4) flopping, (5) having a team total of less or more than five players when the 
ball becomes alive, (6) a player hanging on the basket ring or backboard, (7) participation in 
the game when not on team’s active list, or (8) shattering the backboard or making the rim 
unplayable during the game (Comments On the Rules, Section II(G)) is not considered an act 
of unsportsmanlike conduct.
d.	 A technical foul shall be assessed for unsportsmanlike tactics such as:
(1)	Disrespectfully addressing an official
(2)	Physically contacting an official
(3)	Overt actions indicating resentment to a call or no-call
(4)	Use of profanity
(5)	A coach entering onto the court without permission of an official
(6)	A deliberately-thrown elbow or any unnatural physical act towards an opponent 
with no contact involved
(7)	Taunting

e.	 Cursing at or blaspheming an official shall not be considered the only cause for 
imposing technical fouls. Running tirades, continuous criticism, or griping may be sufficient 
cause to assess a technical. Excessive misconduct shall result in ejection from the game.
f.	 Assessment of a technical foul shall be avoided whenever and wherever possible; 
but, when necessary they are to be assessed without delay or procrastination. Once a player 
has been ejected or the game is over, technical fouls cannot be assessed regardless of the 
provocation. Any additional unsportsmanlike conduct shall be reported by e-mail immediately 
to the League Office.
g.	 If a technical foul is assessed to a team following a personal foul on the same team, 
the free throw attempt for the technical foul shall be administered first.
h.	 The ball shall be awarded to the team which had possession at the time the technical 
foul was assessed, whether the free throw attempt is successful or not. Play shall be resumed by 
a throw-in nearest the spot where play was interrupted.
EXCEPTION: Rule 12A, Section I and Rule 12A, Section III
i.	 Anyone guilty of illegal contact which occurs during a dead ball may be assessed 
(1) a technical foul, if the contact is deemed to be unsportsmanlike in nature, or (2) a flagrant 
foul, if unnecessary and/or excessive contact occurs.
j.	 Free throws awarded for a technical foul must be attempted by a player in the game 
when the technical foul is assessed.
(1)	If a substitute has been beckoned into the game or has been recognized by the 
officials as being in the game prior to a technical foul being assessed, he is eligible to 
attempt the free throw(s).
(2)	If the technical foul is assessed before the opening tap, any player listed in the 
scorebook as a starter is eligible to attempt the free throw(s).
(3)	If a technical foul is assessed before the starting lineup is indicated, any player 
on the squad may attempt the free throw(s).
k.	 A technical foul, unsportsmanlike act, or flagrant foul must be called for a participant 
to be ejected.
EXCEPTION: Rule 12A, Section V(l)(4)
l.	 A player, coach, trainer, or other team bench person must be ejected for:
(1)	A punching foul
(2)	A fighting foul
(3)	Technical foul for an attempted punch or swing with no contact or a thrown elbow 
toward an opponent above shoulder level with no contact
(4)	Deliberately entering the stands other than as a continuance of play
(5)	Flagrant foul penalty (2)
(6)	Second flagrant foul penalty (1)
(7)	Participation in the game when not on team’s active list
m.	 Eye guarding (placing a hand in front of the opponent’s eyes when guarding from 
the rear) a player who does not have possession of the ball is illegal and an unsportsmanlike 
technical shall be assessed.
n.	 A free throw attempt is awarded when one technical foul is assessed.
o.	 No free throw attempts are awarded when a double technical foul is assessed. 
Technical fouls assessed to opposing teams during the same dead ball and prior to the 
administering of any free throw attempt for the first technical foul, shall be interpreted as 
a double technical foul.
p.	 The deliberate act of throwing the ball or any object at an official by a player, 
coach, trainer, or other team bench person is a technical foul and violators are subject to 
ejection from the game.

q.	 Punching fouls, although recorded as both personal and team fouls, are unsportsmanlike 
acts. The player will be ejected immediately.
r.	 Any player who throws or kicks the ball directly into the stands with force, regardless 
of the reason or where it lands, will be assessed a technical foul and ejected. All other 
instances where the ball ends up in the stands will subject the player to a possible technical 
foul and ejection.
Section VI—Fighting Fouls
a.	 Technical fouls shall be assessed to players, coaches, or trainers for fighting. No free 
throws will be attempted. The participants will be ejected immediately.
b.	 This rule applies whether play is in progress or the ball is dead.
c.	 If a fighting foul occurs with a team in possession of the ball, that team will retain 
possession on the sideline nearest the spot where play was interrupted but no nearer to the
baseline than the free throw line extended.
d.	 If a fighting foul occurs with neither team in possession, play will be resumed with a 
jump ball between any two opponents who were in the game at the center circle.
e.	 A fine not exceeding $100,000 and/or suspension may be imposed upon such person(s) 
by the Commissioner at his sole discretion.
Section VII—Fines
a.	 The following progressive technical foul and ejection schedules will apply.
(1)	 REGULAR SEASON
    Technical Fouls 1-5:	
                     $2,000 fine each
    Technical Fouls 6-10:	
                     $3,000 fine each
Technical Fouls 11-15:	
                     $4,000 fine each (with a warning letter
                                                                   sent when the violator reaches his 10th
                                                                   technical foul)
Technical Foul 16:	
                     $5,000 fine plus one-game suspension
Each Additional Technical Foul:	
  $5,000 fine
Each Two Additional Technical Fouls
(18, 20, 22, etc.):	
                     $5,000 fine plus one-game suspension
(2)	PLAYOFFS
Technical Fouls 1-2:	
                     $2,000 fine each
Technical Fouls 3-4:	
                     $3,000 fine each
Technical Fouls 5-6:	
                     $4,000 fine each (with a warning letter
  sent when the violator reaches his 5th
  technical foul)
Technical Foul 7:	
                     $5,000 fine plus one-game suspension
Each Additional Technical Foul:	
  $5,000 fine
Each Two Additional Technical Fouls
(9, 11, 13, etc.):	
                     $5,000 fine plus one-game suspension
Note that a player will be fined $2,000 for any technical foul committed during the 
In-Season Tournament Championship game or any Play-In Game, but such foul(s) will 
not count towards the player’s total technical fouls for the Regular Season or Playoffs 
for purposes of the schedules above.
(3)	EJECTIONS
First Ejection:           	
                     $2,000
Each Subsequent Ejection:	                      Player’s last ejection fine plus $2,000
All players will revert to the $2,000 ejection level for the playoffs.

Note that a player will be fined $2,000 if he is ejected from the In-Season Tournament 
Championship game or a Play-In Game, but such ejection(s) will not count towards the 
player’s total ejections for purposes of the schedule above.
b.	 Whether or not said player(s) is ejected, a fine not exceeding $100,000 and/or 
suspension may be imposed upon such player(s) by the Commissioner at his sole discretion.
c.	 During an altercation, all players not participating in the game must remain in the 
immediate vicinity of their bench. Violators may be subject to a one-game suspension and fined 
up to $100,000.
In determining whether to impose discipline on a player for leaving the bench area in 
connection with an altercation during a game, the NBA will take into account the following 
factors, as well as any other relevant facts and circumstances:  (i) the distance the player traveled 
from his team’s bench, and (ii) the extent to which he entered the immediate proximity of the 
altercation.
A team must have a minimum of eight players dressed and eligible and able to play in each 
preseason and regular season game and nine in each Play-In and playoff game.
In the event that multiple players on a team are suspended for leaving the bench, and if 
necessary in order for the team to have the requisite number of players eligible and able to play in 
a game, the suspensions will be served over multiple games (e.g., with some players suspended 
for the first game following the altercation and other players suspended for the second game 
following the altercation), with the players serving their suspensions alphabetically, according 
to the first letters of their last names.  
d.	 A player, coach, or assistant coach, upon being notified by an official that he/she has been
ejected from the game, must leave the playing area IMMEDIATELY and remain in the dressing
room of his/her team during such suspension until completion of the game or leave the building. 
Violation of this rule shall call for an automatic fine. A fine not to exceed $100,000 and possible 
forfeiture of the game may be imposed for any violation of this rule.
e.	 Any player who in the opinion of the officials has deliberately hung on the basket 
ring shall be assessed a non-unsportsmanlike technical foul and a fine of at least $2,000.
EXCEPTION: An offensive or defensive player may hang on the basket ring, backboard, 
or support to prevent an injury to himself or another player, with no penalty.
f.	 At halftime and the end of each game, the coach and his/her players are to leave the 
court and go directly to their dressing room, without pause or delay. There is to be absolutely 
no talking to game officials.
g.	 Any player who is assessed a flagrant foul—penalty (2) must be ejected and will be 
fined a minimum of $2,000. The incident will be reported to the League Office.
B. Personal Foul
Section I—Types
a.	 A player shall not hold, push, charge into, or impede the progress of an opponent by 
extending a hand, arm, leg, or knee or by bending the body into a position that is not normal. 
Contact that results in the re-routing of an opponent is a foul which must be called immediately.
b.	 Contact initiated by the defensive player guarding a player with the ball is not legal. 
This contact includes, but is not limited to, forearm, hands, or body check.
EXCEPTIONS:
(1)	A defender may apply contact with a forearm to an offensive player with the ball 
who has his back to the basket below the free throw line extended outside the 
Lower Defensive Box.
(2)	A defender may apply contact with a forearm and/or one hand with a bent elbow to 
an offensive player in a post-up position with the ball in the Lower Defensive Box.

(3)	A defender may apply contact with a forearm to an offensive player with the ball at 
any time in the Lower Defensive Box.
The forearm in the above exceptions is solely for the purpose of maintaining a 
defensive position.
(4)	A defender may position his leg between the legs of an offensive player in 
a post-up position in the Lower Defensive Box for the purpose of maintaining 
defensive position. If his foot leaves the floor in an attempt to dislodge his opponent, 
it is a foul immediately.
(5)	Incidental contact with the hand against an offensive player shall be ignored if it 
does not affect the player’s speed, quickness, balance, and/or rhythm.
c.	 Any player whose actions against an opponent cause illegal contact with yet another 
opponent has committed the personal foul.
d.	 A personal foul committed by the offensive team during a throw-in shall be an 
offensive foul, regardless of whether the ball has been released.
e.	 Contact which occurs on the hand of the offensive player, while that part of the hand 
is in contact with the ball, is legal.
EXCEPTION: Flagrant and punching fouls.
PENALTIES: The offender is charged with a personal foul. The offending team is 
charged with a team foul if the illegal contact was caused by the defender. There is no team 
foul if there are personal fouls on one member of each team or the personal foul is against an
offensive player. The offended team is awarded:
(1)	the ball out-of-bounds on the sideline at the nearest spot where play was 
interrupted but no nearer to the baseline than the free throw line extended if an 
offensive foul is assessed. 
(2)	the ball out-of-bounds on the sideline where play was interrupted but no nearer to 
the baseline than the free throw line extended if the personal foul is on the defender 
and if the penalty situation is not in effect.
(3)	one free throw attempt if the personal foul is on the defender and there is a 
successful field goal or free throw on the play.
(4)	two/three free throw attempts if the personal foul is on the defender and the 
offensive player is in the act of shooting an unsuccessful field goal.
(5)	one free throw attempt plus a penalty free throw attempt if the personal foul is 
on the defender and the offensive player is not in the act of attempting a field goal 
if the penalty situation is in effect.
(6)	two free throw attempts and possession of the ball on the sideline nearest the spot 
where play was interrupted if an offensive player, or a teammate, is fouled while 
having a clear-path-to-the-basket. A clear-path-to-the-basket foul occurs if: (i) a 
personal foul is committed on any offensive player during his team’s transition scoring 
opportunity; (ii) when the foul occurs, the ball is ahead of the tip of the circle in the 
backcourt, no defender is ahead of the offensive player with the scoring opportunity 
and that offensive player is in control of the ball or a pass to him has been released; and 
(iii) the defensive foul deprives the offensive team of a transition scoring opportunity.  
A clear-path-to-the-basket foul cannot occur if (i) the offensive player is fouled in the 
act of shooting or (ii) the foul is caused by the defender’s attempt to intercept or deflect 
a pass intended for the offensive player with the transition scoring opportunity.  
(7)	two free throw attempts if a personal foul is committed against an offensive 
player without the ball when his team has at least a one-man advantage on a fast break 
and the defensive player takes a foul to stop play.

(8)	one free throw attempt, and possession of the ball on the sideline nearest the spot 
where play was interrupted but no nearer to the baseline than the free throw line 
extended, when a defender commits a transition take foul. The free throw may be 
attempted by any player on the offended team in the game at the time the foul was 
committed.
Section II—By Dribbler
a.	 A dribbler shall not (1) charge into an opponent who has established a legal 
guarding position, (2) attempt to dribble between two opponents, or (3) attempt to dribble 
between an opponent and a boundary, where sufficient space is not available for illegal 
contact to be avoided.
b.	 If a defender is able to establish a legal position in the straight line path of the 
dribbler, the dribbler must avoid contact by changing direction or ending his dribble.
c.	 The dribbler must be in control of his body at all times. If illegal contact occurs, 
the responsibility is on the dribbler.
PENALTY: The offender is assessed an offensive foul. There is no team foul. The ball 
is awarded to the offended team on the sideline nearest the spot where play was interrupted 
but no nearer to the baseline than the free throw line extended.
EXCEPTION: Rule 3, Section I(a)
d.	 If a dribbler has sufficient space to have his head and shoulders in advance of his 
defender, the responsibility for illegal contact is on the defender.
e.	 If a dribbler has established a straight line path, a defender may not crowd him out 
of that path.
PENALTY: The defender shall be assessed a personal foul and a team foul. If the 
penalty is not in effect, the offended team is awarded the ball on the sideline nearest the spot 
where play was interrupted but no nearer to the baseline than the free throw line extended. If 
the penalty is in effect, one free throw attempt plus a penalty free throw attempt is awarded.
Section III—By Screening
A player who sets a screen shall not (1) assume a position nearer than a normal step 
from an opponent, if that opponent is stationary and unaware of the screener’s position, or 
make illegal contact with an opponent when he assumes a position at the side or front of 
an opponent, (2) assume a position so near to a moving opponent that he is not given an 
opportunity to avoid contact before making illegal contact, or (3) move laterally or toward 
an opponent being screened, after having assumed a legal position. The screener may move 
in the same direction and path of the opponent being screened.
In (2) above, the speed of the opponent being screened will determine what the 
screener’s stationary position may be. This position will vary and may be one to two normal 
steps or strides from his opponent.
Section IV—Flagrant Foul
a.	 If contact committed against a player, with or without the ball, is interpreted to be 
unnecessary, a flagrant foul—penalty (1) will be assessed. A personal foul is charged to the 
offender and a team foul is charged to the team.
PENALTY: (1) Two free throws shall be attempted and the ball awarded to the offended 
team on either side of the court at the free throw line extended. (2) If the offended player is 
injured and unable to attempt his free throws, his coach will select one of the remaining four 
players in the game to attempt the free throws. (3) His coach will pick the substitute, who 
may not be replaced until the ball is legally touched by a player on the court. (EXCEPTION: 
Rule 3, Section V(e).) (4) The injured player may not return to the game. (EXCEPTION: 
Rule 9, Section II(a)(2).) (5) A player will be ejected if he commits two flagrant fouls in the 
same game.

b.	 If contact committed against a player, with or without the ball, is interpreted to be 
unnecessary and excessive, a flagrant foul—penalty (2) will be assessed. A personal foul is 
charged to the offender and a team foul is charged to the team.
PENALTY: (1) Two free throws shall be attempted and the ball awarded to the offended 
team on either side of the court at the free throw line extended. (2) If the offended player is 
injured and unable to attempt his free throws, his coach will select a substitute and any player 
from the team is eligible to attempt the free throws. (3) This substitute may not be replaced 
until the ball is legally touched by a player on the court. (EXCEPTION: Rule 3, Section 
V(e).) (4) The injured player may return to the game at any time after the free throws are 
attempted. (5) This is an unsportsmanlike act and the offender is ejected.
c.	 A flagrant foul may be assessed whether the ball is dead or alive.
d.	 A foul must be reviewed using Instant Replay to confirm it meets the criteria to be 
ruled a Flagrant (1) or (2).
Section V—Free Throw Penalty Situations
a.	 Each team is limited to four team fouls per regulation period without additional 
penalties. Common fouls charged as team fouls, in excess of four, will be penalized by one 
free throw attempt plus a penalty free throw attempt.
(1)	The first four common fouls committed by a team in any regulation period shall 
result in the ball being awarded to the opposing team on the sideline nearest where 
play was interrupted. The ball shall be awarded no nearer to the baseline than the free 
throw line extended.
(2)	The first three common fouls committed by a team in any overtime period, shall 
result in the ball being awarded to the opposing team on the sideline nearest where 
play was interrupted. The ball shall be awarded no nearer to the baseline than the free 
throw line extended.
(3)	If a team has not committed its quota of four team fouls during the first ten minutes 
of any regulation period, or its quota of three team fouls during the first three minutes 
of any overtime period, it shall be permitted to incur one team foul during the last two 
minutes without penalty.
(4)	During any overtime period, common fouls charged as team fouls in excess of 
three, will be penalized by one free throw plus a penalty free throw attempt.
(5)	Personal fouls which are flagrant, punching, away-from-the-play, clear path-to-the-
basket, or transition take foul, will carry their own separate penalties and are included 
in the team foul total.
(6)	Personal fouls committed during a successful field goal attempt or free throw, 
which result in one free throw attempt being awarded, will not result in an additional 
free throw attempt if the penalty situation exists.
b.	 A maximum of three points may be scored by the same team on a successful two 
point field goal attempt.
c.	 A maximum of four points may be scored by the same team on a successful three 
point field goal attempt.
Section VI—Double Fouls
a.	 No free throw attempts will be awarded on double fouls, whether they are personal 
or technical.

b.	 Double personal fouls shall add to a player’s total, but not to the team total.
c.	 If a double foul occurs, the team in possession of the ball at the time of the call shall 
retain possession. Play is resumed on the sideline, nearest the point where play was interrupted 
but no nearer to the baseline than the free throw line extended. The shot clock is reset to 24 
seconds if the ball is to be inbounded in the team’s backcourt, or stay the same or reset to 14, 
whichever is greater, if the ball is to be inbounded in the frontcourt.
d.	 If a double foul occurs with neither team in possession, or when the ball is in the air 
on an unsuccessful field goal or free throw attempt, play will be resumed with a jump ball 
at the center circle between any two opponents in the game at that time. If injury, ejection, 
or disqualification makes it necessary for any player to be replaced, no substitute may 
participate in the jump ball. The jumper shall be selected from one of the remaining players 
in the game.
e.	 If a double foul occurs on a successful field goal or free throw attempt, the team that 
has been scored upon will inbound the ball at the baseline as after any other score.
f.	 If a double foul occurs as a result of a difference in opinion by the officials, no points 
can be scored and play shall resume with a jump ball at the center circle between any two 
opponents in the game at that time. No substitute may participate in the jump ball.
Section VII—Offensive Fouls
a.	 A personal foul assessed against an offensive player which is neither punching or 
flagrant shall be penalized in the following manner:
(1)	No points can be scored by the offensive team
(2)	The offending player is charged with a personal foul
(3)	The offending team is not charged with a team foul
EXCEPTION: Rule 3, Section I(a). No penalty free throws are awarded.
(4)	The ball is awarded to the offended team out-of-bounds on the sideline at the 
nearest spot where play was interrupted but no nearer to the baseline than the free 
throw line extended.
b.	 A personal foul assessed against an offensive player which is punching or flagrant 
shall be penalized in the following manner:
(1)	No points can be scored by the offensive team
(2)	The offending player is charged with a personal foul
(3)	The offending team is charged with a team foul
(4)	Two free throw attempts are awarded to the offended player
(5)	The ball shall be awarded at the free throw line extended
Section VIII—Loose Ball Fouls
a.	 A personal foul, which is neither a punching or flagrant, committed while there is no 
team control shall be administered in the following manner:
(1)	Offending team is charged with a team foul
(2)	Offending player is charged with a personal foul
(3)	Offended team will be awarded possession on the sideline, nearest the spot where 
play was interrupted but no nearer to the baseline than the foul line extended, if no 
penalty exists

(4)	Offended player is awarded one free throw attempt plus a penalty free throw 
attempt if the offending team is in a penalty situation
b.	 If a “loose ball” foul called against the defensive team is then followed by a successful 
field goal, one free throw attempt will be awarded to the offended player, allowing for the 
three point or four point play. This interpretation applies:
(1)	Regardless of which offensive player is fouled
(2)	Whether or not the penalty situation exists. The ball can never be awarded to the 
scoring team out-of-bounds following a personal foul which occurs on the same play
c.	 If a “loose ball” foul called against the defensive team is followed by a successful 
free throw, one free throw will be awarded to the offended player whether or not the penalty 
is in effect.
d.	 If a “loose ball” foul called against the offensive team is then followed by a successful 
field goal attempt by the same offensive player, no points may be scored.
Section IX—Punching Fouls
a.	 Illegal contact called on a player for punching is a personal foul and a team foul. 
Two free throw attempts shall be awarded, regardless of the number of previous fouls in the 
period. The ball shall be awarded to the offended team out-of-bounds on either side of the 
court at the free throw line extended whether the free throw is successful or unsuccessful.
b.	 Any player who throws a punch, whether it connects or not, has committed an 
unsportsmanlike act. He will be ejected following confirmation during review by instant 
replay and suspended for a minimum of one game.
c.	 This rule applies whether play is in progress or the ball is dead.
d.	 In the case where one punching foul is followed by another, all aspects of the rule 
are applied in both cases, and the team last offended is awarded possession on the sideline at 
the free throw line extended in the frontcourt.
e.	 A fine not exceeding $100,000 and/or suspension may be imposed upon such player(s) 
by the Commissioner at his sole discretion.
Section X—Away-From-The-Play Foul
a.	 An away-from-the-play foul, which is defined in Rule 4, Section IV(h), shall be 
administered as follows:
(1)	A personal foul and team foul shall be assessed and one free throw attempt shall 
be awarded. The free throw may be attempted by any player in the game at the time 
the personal foul was committed.
(2)	If the foul occurs when the ball is inbounds, the offended team shall be awarded 
the ball on the sideline at the nearest point where play was interrupted but no nearer 
to the baseline than the free throw line extended.
(3)	If the foul occurs prior to the release on a throw-in, the offended team shall be 
awarded the ball at the original throw-in spot, with all privileges, if any, remaining.
EXCEPTION: Rule 12B, Section X(b)
b.	 In the event that the personal foul committed is a flagrant or punching foul, the play 
shall be administered as follows:
(1)	A personal foul and team foul shall be assessed and the free throw shooter shall be 
awarded two free throw attempts. The free throws may be attempted by any player 
in the game at the time the flagrant foul was committed.

(2)	If a flagrant foul—penalty (1) is assessed and the offended player is unable 
to participate in the game, the substitute will be selected by his coach. The two free 
throws may be attempted by any of the four remaining players in the game. The ball 
will be awarded to the offended team at the free throw line extended in the frontcourt. 
The injured player may return to the game.
(3)	If a flagrant foul—penalty (2) or punching foul is assessed and the offended 
player is unable to attempt his free throws because of injury, the substitute will be 
selected by his coach. The two free throws may be attempted by the substitute or any 
of the four remaining players in the game. If the offended player is unable to attempt 
his free throws as a result of being ejected, any of the four remaining players may 
attempt the free throws. The ball will be awarded to the offended team at the free 
throw line extended in the frontcourt. The injured player may return to the game.
Section XI—Transition Take Foul
a.	 A transition take foul, which is defined in Rule 4, Section IV(i), shall be administered 
as follows:
A personal foul and team foul shall be assessed and one free throw attempt shall be 
awarded. The free throw may be attempted by any player in the game at the time the personal 
foul was committed. After the free attempt, the offended team shall be awarded possession of 
the ball on the sideline nearest the spot where play was interrupted but no nearer to the baseline 
than the free throw line extended.
b.	 In the event that the personal foul committed is a flagrant or punching foul, the play 
shall be administered as follows:
(1)	A personal foul and team foul shall be assessed and the free throw shooter shall be 
awarded two free throw attempts. The free throws may be attempted by any player in 
the game at the time the flagrant foul was committed.
(2)	If a flagrant foul—penalty (1) is assessed and the offended player is unable to 
participate in the game, the substitute will be selected by his coach. The two free 
throws may be attempted by any of the four remaining players in the game. The ball 
will be awarded to the offended team at the free throw line extended in the frontcourt. 
The injured player may return to the game.
(3)	If a flagrant foul—penalty (2) or punching foul is assessed and the offended player 
is unable to attempt his free throws because of injury, the substitute will be selected 
by his coach. The two free throws may be attempted by the substitute or any of the 
four remaining players in the game. If the offended player is unable to attempt his free 
throws as a result of being ejected, any of the four remaining players may attempt 
the free throws. The ball will be awarded to the offended team at the free throw line 
extended in the frontcourt. The injured player may return to the game. 
RULE NO. 13—INSTANT REPLAY
Section I—Instant Replay Review Triggers
a.	 Instant replay will be triggered in the following situations:
(1)	A field goal made with no time remaining on the clock (0:00) at the end of any 
period.
NOTE: Instant replay will NOT be used to check a successful basket in subsection (1) 
above if the throw-in, free throw attempt, or jump ball started with .2 or .1 on the game 
clock. The officials will judge the legality of the basket in these situations based on the 
guidelines as set forth in Comments on the Rules, Section II(L).

(2)	A foul called with no time remaining on the clock (0:00) at the end of any period.
(3)	Officials are not reasonably certain whether a personal foul called at any time 
during a game met the criteria for a flagrant foul.
(4)	An Altercation occurs. (For purposes of this instant replay rule only, an Altercation 
shall mean a situation in which (i) two or more players are engaged in (a) a fight or 
(b) a hostile physical interaction that is not part of normal basketball play and that 
does not immediately resolve by itself or with the intervention of game officials or 
players, or (ii) a player, coach, trainer, or other team bench person commits a hostile 
act against another player, referee, coach, trainer, team bench person, or spectator 
(including, for example, through the use of a punch, elbow, kick, blow to the head, 
shove, or thrown object.)
(5)	A play concludes (i) with no time remaining on the clock (0:00) at the end of 
any period or (ii) at a point when the game officials believe that actual time may have 
expired in any period; and the officials are reasonably certain that the game clock 
malfunctioned during the play.
(6)	Officials are not reasonably certain at any time during a game whether (i) a 
successful field goal was scored correctly as a two-point or three-point field goal, or 
(ii) in the case of a called shooting foul, whether the player was attempting a two-point 
or three-point field goal; provided that the Replay Center Official did not trigger instant 
replay to review these matters as permitted by Section I(b)(1) below. 
(7)	Officials are not reasonably certain at any time during a game whether (i) a 
successful field goal was released prior to the expiration of the shot clock, provided 
that the Replay Center Official did not trigger instant replay to review this matter as 
permitted by Section I(b)(2) below, or (ii) a called foul was committed prior to the 
expiration of the shot clock. 
(8)	Officials are not reasonably certain whether a personal foul called at any time 
during a game met the criteria for a clear-path-to-the-basket foul.
(9)	Officials are not reasonably certain as to which player should attempt free throws 
on a called foul.
(10)	Officials are not reasonably certain whether the ball touched the rim and thus 
whether the shot clock or game clock should be adjusted during the last two minutes 
of the fourth period or last two minutes of any overtime period(s).
(11)	Officials have determined that illegal contact has occurred on a block/charge foul 
but are not reasonably certain as to whether the defender was inside or outside the 
restricted area during the last two minutes of the fourth period or last two minutes of 
any overtime period(s).
(12)	Officials are not reasonably certain whether a goaltending or basket interference 
violation was called correctly during the last two minutes of the fourth period or last 
two minutes of any overtime period(s).
(13)	Officials are not reasonably certain whether an off-ball foul occurred (i) if the off 
ball foul is committed by a defensive player, prior to an offensive player beginning his 
shooting motion on a successful field goal or (ii) if the off ball foul is a double foul 
or committed by an offensive player, prior to (a) a defensive foul that was committed 
prior to the ball being released on a throw-in or (b) the ball being released on a 
successful field goal.
(14)	Officials are not reasonably certain whether a team had the correct number of 
players on the court while the ball is in play.

b.	 Instant replay will be immediately triggered by the Replay Center Official in the 
following situations:
(1)	The Replay Center Official is not reasonably certain whether (i) a successful field 
goal was scored correctly as a two-point or three-point field goal during the first 46 
minutes of regulation or first three minutes of any overtime period, or (ii) in the case 
of a called shooting foul at any time during a game, the Replay Center Official is 
not reasonably certain whether the player was attempting a two-point or three-point 
field goal.
NOTE:  If the Replay Center Official did not trigger instant replay in accordance with 
Section I(b)(1) above, the on-court game officials retain the right to independently 
trigger instant replay (See Section I(a)(6)) within the time constraints set forth in 
Section II(f)(1) below.
(2)	The Replay Center Official is not reasonably certain whether a successful field 
goal was released prior to expiration of the shot clock during the first 46 minutes of 
regulation or first three minutes of any overtime period.
NOTE:  If the Replay Center Official did not trigger instant replay in accordance with 
Section I(b)(2) above, the on-court game officials retain the right to independently 
trigger instant replay (See Section I(a)(7)) within the time constraints set forth in 
Section II(g)(1) below.
Section II—Reviewable Matters
a.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(1) above, the 
Replay Center Official will review the video to determine whether time on the game clock 
expired before the ball left the shooter’s hand.
The Replay Center Official and on-court official(s) may also review the video to deter- 
mine only the following other matters:
(1)	If the shot was timely, whether the successful field goal was scored correctly as a 
two-point or three-point field goal.
(2)	Whether the shooter committed a boundary line violation or the ball touched out-
of-bounds prior to entering the basket.
For purposes of this review, the official will look only at the position of the 
shooter’s feet at the moment they last touched the floor immediately prior to (or, if 
applicable, during) the release of the shot.
(3)	Whether the shot clock expired before the ball left the shooter’s hand.
(4)	Whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the ball left the 
shooter’s hand.
(5)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
b.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(2) above, the 
Replay Center Official and official who called the foul will review the video to determine the 
following: (i) whether a called foul that is not committed on or by a player in the act of shooting 
occurred prior to the expiration of time on the game clock; or (ii) for a called foul that is 
committed on or by a player in the act of shooting: (a) whether the foul occurred prior to the 
expiration of time on the game clock; or (b) whether the shooter released the ball prior to the 
expiration of time on the game clock if the foul occurred after the expiration of time.
The Replay Center Official and on-court official(s) may also review the video to deter- 
mine only the following other matters:
(1)	Whether the shooter fouled was attempting a two-point or three-point field goal.

(2)	Whether a player fouled committed a boundary line violation prior to the foul or the 
ball touched out-of-bounds on a successful basket.
For purposes of this review, the Replay Center Official will look only at the position 
of the player’s feet at the moment they last touched the floor immediately prior to 
(or, if applicable, during) the foul.
(3)	Whether the shot clock expired before the foul occurred.
(4)	Whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the player was fouled.
(5)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
(6)	Whether a flopping violation proximate to the called foul should be assessed or 
rescinded.
c.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(3) above, the 
Replay Center Official and on-court officials will review the video to determine only the 
following issues:
(1)	Whether the personal foul should stand or be ruled a flagrant foul penalty 1 or 2 
or a technical foul.
(2)	Whether any other players committed unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact 
immediately prior to and/or immediately following the calling of the foul.
(3)	Whether a flopping violation proximate to the called foul should be assessed or 
rescinded.
d.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(4) above, the 
Replay Center Official and on-court officials will review the video to determine only the 
following issues:
(1)	The identity of all players, coaches, trainers, or team bench persons involved in 
the Altercation and the action immediately prior to and immediately following the 
Altercation.
(2)	The level of involvement of each such player, coach, trainer, or team bench person.
(3)	The appropriate penalty to be assessed against each such player, coach, trainer, or 
team bench person. 
(4)	Whether a flopping violation proximate to the Altercation should be assessed or 
rescinded
e.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(5) above, the Replay 
Center Official and on-court official(s) will review the video to determine the following issues:
(1)	The proper time (if any) on the game clock following the clock malfunction by 
determining how much time on the game clock actually expired.
(2)	For a successful field goal, whether the ball left the shooter’s hand prior to the 
expiration of actual time.
(3)	Whether a called foul that is not committed on or by a player in the act of shooting 
occurred prior to the expiration of actual time.
(4)	For a called foul that is committed on or by a player in the act of shooting:
(i) whether the foul occurred prior to the expiration of actual time; or
(ii) whether the shooter released the ball prior to the expiration of actual time if the foul 
occurred after the expiration of actual time.
The Replay Center Official and on-court officials may also review the video to 
determine only the following other matters:
(5)	If the shot was timely, whether the successful field goal was scored correctly as a 
two-point or three-point field goal or, in the case of a shooting foul, whether 
the shooter fouled was attempting a two-point or three-point field goal.

(6)	Whether the shooter committed a boundary line violation or the ball touched out-
of-bounds prior to entering the basket or, in the case of a foul, whether the player 
fouled committed a boundary line violation. For purposes of this review, the Replay 
Center Official will look only at the position of the player’s feet at the moment they 
last touched the floor immediately prior to (or, if applicable, during) the release of the 
shot or the foul (as applicable).
(7)	Whether the shot clock expired before the ball left the shooter’s hand or the foul 
occurred.
(8)	Whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the ball entered the 
frontcourt.
(9)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred. 
NOTE: If time is added to the game clock:
(i) The team with possession of the ball when the horn or whistle sounds will retain 
possession on the sideline at the nearest spot.
(ii) If the ball is released on an unsuccessful field goal attempt or is loose when the horn 
or whistle sounds, the ball will be jumped at center circle between any two opponents 
in the game (except that, if a team would have imminently gained possession of the 
ball at the time of the stoppage, such team would be awarded possession pursuant to 
Rule 4, Section XIV).
(iii) If the horn or whistle sounds while a successful field goal is in flight, the opposing 
team will inbound on the baseline as after any successful field goal.
f.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(6) above, the Replay 
Center Official and on-court official(s) will review the video to determine the following issues:
(1)	Whether the successful field goal was scored correctly as a two-point or three-point 
field goal. Prior to the last two minutes of the 4th period or the last two minutes of 
any overtime period, the review must take place prior to the end of the next timeout or 
period break following the basket in question.
During the last two minutes of the 4th period or the last two minutes of any overtime 
period, the review must take place at the next clock stoppage, including immediately 
upon a successful basket when the clock stops in the last two minutes. If a successful 
two-point/three-point field goal is not reviewed in accordance with the foregoing 
timing rules, the play can no longer be reviewed once the ball is inbounded and 
touched on the court, a personal foul is assessed or violation is whistled.
(2)	Whether the shooter fouled was attempting a two-point or three-point field goal. 
During the entire game, the review must take place prior to the shooter releasing the 
first free throw attempt.
The Replay Center Official and on-court official(s) may also review the video to 
determine only the following other matters:
(3)	Whether the shooter committed a boundary line violation or the ball touched out-
of-bounds prior to entering the basket or, in the case of a foul, whether the player 
fouled committed a boundary line violation. For purposes of this review, the Replay 
Center Official would look only at the position of the player’s feet at the moment 
they last touched the floor immediately prior to (or, if applicable, during) the release 
of the shot or the foul (as applicable).
(4)	Whether the shot clock expired before the ball left the shooter’s hand or the foul 
occurred.
(5)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
(6)	During the last two minutes of the 4th period or last two minutes of any overtime 
period, in the case of a foul, whether a flopping violation proximate to the called foul 
should be assessed or rescinded.

g.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(7) above, the 
Replay Center Official and the official who called the foul will review the video to determine 
the following issues:
(1)	Whether time on the shot clock expired before the ball left the shooter’s hand. 
Prior to the last two minutes of the 4th period or the last two minutes of any overtime 
period, the review must take place prior to the end of the next timeout or period break 
following the basket in question. During the last two minutes of the 4th period or the 
last two minutes of any overtime period, the review will take place at the next clock 
stoppage, including immediately upon a successful basket when the clock stops in 
the last two minutes. If a shot clock violation is not reviewed in accordance with the 
foregoing timing rules, it may not be reviewed thereafter.
(2)	Whether a called foul that is not committed on or by a player in the act of shooting 
occurred prior to the expiration of time on the shot clock.
(3)	For a called foul that is committed on or by a player in the act of shooting: whether 
the foul occurred prior to the expiration of time on the shot clock; or (ii) whether the 
shooter released the ball prior to the expiration of time on the shot clock if the foul 
occurred after the expiration of time on the shot clock.
During the entire game, the review of a foul occurring as the shot clock expires must 
take place prior to the shooter releasing the first free throw attempt or prior to the 
subsequent inbounding of the ball.
The Replay Center Official and on-court official(s) may also review the video to 
determine only the following other matters:
(4)	If the shot was timely, whether the successful field goal was scored correctly as a 
two-point or three-point field goal or, in the case of a shooting foul, whether the 
shooter fouled was attempting a two-point or three-point field goal.
(5)	Whether the shooter committed a boundary line violation or the ball touched out-
of-bounds prior to entering the basket or, in the case of a foul, whether the player 
fouled committed a boundary line violation. For purposes of this review, the Replay 
Center Official would look only at the position of the player’s feet at the moment they 
last touched the floor immediately prior to (or, if applicable, during) the release of the 
shot or the foul (as applicable).
(6)	Whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the ball left the 
shooter’s hand or the player was fouled.
(7)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
(8)	In the case of a foul, whether a flopping violation proximate to the called foul 
should be assessed or rescinded.
h.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(8) above, the 
Replay Center Official and the official who called the foul would review the video to deter- 
mine whether:
(1)	When the foul was called, the ball is ahead of the tip of the circle in the backcourt, 
no defender is ahead of the offensive player with the scoring opportunity and that 
offensive player is in control of the ball or a pass to him has been released.
(2)	The foul deprived the offensive team of a transition scoring opportunity. 
(3)	The foul was committed prior to the offensive player starting his shooting motion.
(4)	The foul was caused by the defender’s attempt to intercept or deflect a pass intended 
for the player with the transition scoring opportunity.
(5)	Any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
(6)	Whether a flopping violation proximate to the called foul should be assessed or 
rescinded.

i.	 If an instant replay review is triggered in Section I(a)(9) above, the Replay Center 
Official and the official who called the foul will review the video to determine which player 
was fouled. The review must take place prior to the first free throw being released. The 
Officials would not review video to determine which player committed the foul in question.
The Replay Center Official and on-court officials may review the video to determine only 
the following other matters:
(1)	Whether the shooter fouled was attempting a two-point or three-point field goal.
(2)	Whether the player fouled committed a boundary line violation prior to the foul.
For purposes of this review, the official will look only at the position of the 
player’s feet at the moment they last touched the floor immediately prior to (or, 
if applicable, during) the foul.
(3)	Whether the shot clock expired before the foul occurred.
(4)	Whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the player was fouled.
(5)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
(6)	Whether a flopping violation proximate to the called foul should be assessed or 
rescinded.
j.	 If an instant replay review is triggered in Section I(a)(10) above, the Replay Center 
Official will review the video to determine whether the ball touched the rim, and make 
any adjustments to the game clock, shot clock, score, and possession that are appropriate in 
accordance with the following:
(1)	If play has stopped following the offensive team retaining possession (e.g., the 
offensive team has made a successful field goal, or a violation or foul has been 
called), the play must be reviewed immediately upon such stoppage of play and:
(i)	 For a successful field goal, the Replay Center Official will time the play to 
determine whether the field goal was released prior to the expiration of the 24 
second shot clock. If the Replay Center Official determines that the ball was 
released before the shot clock expired, the points will count and the opposing 
team will inbound on the baseline as after any successful field goal. If the 
Replay Center Official determines that the ball was released after the shot 
clock should have expired, the points will not count and the opposing team 
will be awarded the ball at the free throw line extended.
(ii)	 For a called foul, the Replay Center Official and official who called the 
foul will time the play to determine whether the foul occurred prior to the 
expiration of the shot clock or, in the case of a called foul that is committed 
on a player in the act of shooting, whether the shooter released the ball 
prior to the expiration of the shot clock. If the Replay Center Official and 
official determines that the foul occurred or the ball was released prior to 
the expiration of the shot clock, the called foul will be upheld. If the Replay 
Center Official determines that the foul occurred or the ball was released after 
the expiration of the shot clock, the called foul will be overturned and a shot 
clock violation assessed. (EXCEPTION: Flagrant fouls and unsportsmanlike 
acts and points scored therefrom will not be nullified.)
(iii)	If the ball is caused to become out-of-bounds by the defensive team or a 
defensive violation is assessed, the Replay Center Official will time the play 
to determine how much time should be on the shot clock or if a shot clock 
violation should be assessed.
(2)	If play is continuous (i.e., if there is no stoppage in play following the offensive 
team retaining possession of the ball), the officials will stop play during the first pause

in action prior to any subsequent change of possession. If the Replay Center Official 
determines following the review that the shot clock is correct (i.e., no adjustment is 
required), then play will resume from the point of interruption. If the Replay Center 
Official determines that the shot clock is incorrect, then the shot clock will be reset to 
the time the ball was possessed by the offensive team following the ball touching (or 
not touching) the rim, and the game clock will also be reset to reflect the change. The 
ball will be inbounded on the sideline nearest the spot where the ball was possessed.
(3)	If play is stopped while neither team is in possession of the ball and the Replay 
Center Official determines following the review that a shot clock violation has not 
occurred, then possession shall be awarded to a team if, at the time of the whistle, 
such team clearly and conclusively would have imminently gained possession of 
the ball, as determined by (1) the proximity of opposing player(s) to the ball (or 
lack thereof), and (2) the actual outcome of the play in the natural and immediate 
aftermath of the whistle.
(4)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
If an instant replay review for a shot clock adjustment is not reviewed in accordance 
with the timing rules set forth above, it may not be reviewed at any point thereafter.
The Replay Center Official will have the final ruling on all other scenarios and clock 
adjustments.
k.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(11) above, the 
Replay Center Official and the official who called the foul will review the video to determine:
(1)	Whether the defender was inside or outside the restricted area.
(2)	Whether the defender was in a legal guarding position.
(3)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
(4)	Whether a flopping violation proximate to the called foul should be assessed or 
rescinded.
l.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(12) above, the 
Replay Center Official would review the video in accordance with Rule 11, Section I. The 
Replay Center Official and on-court officials(s) may also review the video to determine only 
the following other matters:
(1)	If goaltending or basket interference was ruled prior to the ball touching the rim, 
whether the shooter committed a boundary line violation. For purposes of this review, 
the Replay Center Official will look only at the position of the shooter’s feet at the 
moment they last touched the floor immediately prior to (or, if applicable, during) the 
release of the shot and the flight of the ball.
(2)	If goaltending or basket interference was ruled prior to the ball touching the rim, 
whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the ball left the shooter’s hand.
(3)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
If the instant replay review results in the call on the floor being overturned, play is 
resumed at the point of interruption (as defined in Rule 4, Section XIV).
m.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(13) above, the 
Replay Center Official and the official who called the foul will review the video to determine:
(1)	Whether the shot clock expired before the foul occurred.
(2)	Whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the player was fouled.
(3)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
(4)	Whether a flopping violation proximate to the called foul should be assessed or 
rescinded.

n.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(a)(14) above, the 
Replay Center Official would review the video in accordance with Rule 12A, Section III. The 
Replay Center Official and on-court official(s) may also review the video to determine 
whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
o.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(b)(1), the Replay 
Center Official will immediately review the video to determine the following issues:
(1)	Whether the successful field goal was scored correctly as a two-point or three-point 
field goal.
(2)	Whether the shooter fouled was attempting a two-point or three-point field goal.
The Replay Center Official will also review the video to determine only the following 
other matters:
(3)	Whether the shooter committed a boundary line violation or the ball touched 
out-of-bounds prior to entering the basket or, in the case of a foul, whether the 
player fouled committed a boundary line violation. For purposes of this review, 
the Replay Center Official will look only at the position of the player’s feet at the 
moment they last touched the floor immediately prior to (or, if applicable, during) 
the release of the shot or the foul (as applicable).
(4)	Whether the shot clock expired before the ball left the shooter’s hand or the 
foul occurred.
The Replay Center Official’s review must take place within the same time constraints 
set forth in Section II(f)(1) above.
p.	 If an instant replay review is triggered as described in Section I(b)(2) above, the 
Replay Center Official will immediately review the video to determine whether time on the 
shot clock expired before the ball left the shooter’s hand.
The Replay Center Official may also review the video to determine only the following 
other matters:
(1)	If the shot was timely, whether the successful field goal was scored correctly as a 
two-point or three-point field goal.
(2)	Whether the shooter committed a boundary line violation or the ball touched out-
of-bounds prior to entering the basket.  For purposes of this review, the Replay Center 
Official will look only at the position of the player’s feet at the moment they last 
touched the floor immediately prior to (or, if applicable, during) the release of the 
shot or the foul (as applicable).
(3)	Whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the ball left the shooter’s 
hand or the player was fouled.
The Replay Center Official’s review must take place within the same time constraints 
set forth in Section II(g)(1) above.
NOTE: For purposes of Section II (b, c, d, f, g, h, i, k, and m) above, the factors that 
will be considered in determining whether a prior flopping violation is proximate to the 
called foul include (1) whether the player(s) involved in the flopping violation are the 
same or different players than the ones involved in the called foul under review, (2) the 
distance between the flopping violation, and the called foul under review, and (3) the 
time elapsed between the flopping violation, and the called foul under review.

Section III—Replay Review Process
a.	 Except as set forth in Rule 14 below, replay reviews will be triggered by the on-court 
game officials and Replay Center Official in accordance with the rules set forth in Section I 
above. The Replay Center Official will determine the final outcome on all replays triggered 
pursuant to Section I above except Flagrant Fouls and Altercations, which will be decided by the 
on-court officials, with personnel in the Replay Center playing a supporting role. In all cases, 
the two game officials will inform both team benches that the play will be reviewed. For replay 
reviews to be determined by the Replay Center Official, the calling official, and the crew chief at 
his/her discretion, will go to the scorer’s table and put on the headset to receive the ruling from 
the Replay Center Official and the other on-court official(s) will prepare the players to return to 
play. If the ruling is to be made by the on-court officials, the crew chief and a second official will 
go to the scorer’s table and make the ruling with the assistance of the Replay Center Official. The 
third official will monitor the benches.
b.	 Replay reviews should be conducted within two minutes. Notwithstanding this 
general rule, discretion will be used to extend the review period as reasonably necessary under 
unusual circumstances, such as when the play could lead to an ejection (e.g., flagrant fouls/
penalty 2), technical issues arise with the replay system, the outcome of the replay review 
requires multiple replay review angles, or additional angles are imminent. In addition, replay 
reviews of Altercations should be concluded within whatever time is reasonably necessary, even 
if that time period extends beyond two minutes.
c.	 If the replay system is not functioning properly, or not available, the officials will use 
the nearest courtside broadcast production TV monitor available.
d.	 The Replay Center Official will use the following to make his/her ruling in the order 
listed below regarding scoring, timing, or fouls at the end of any period:
(1)	Game clock or shot clock on top of backboard
(2)	LED lights
(3)	Game clock on the facades of the balcony
(4)	Game clock on scoreboards hanging from the ceiling
(5)	Superimposed TV clocks
EXCEPTION: For clock malfunctions when clocks start early, late, or freeze—the Replay 
Center Official will use the digital clock in the Replay Center to make the final ruling.
e.	 The officials will keep both teams on the court at the end of the second period if replay 
is being used to determine if a foul was called prior to expiration of the period or if there is any 
question whether the shooter committed a shot clock violation, 8-second violation ,or boundary 
line violation where time may be added to the game clock.
f.	 The officials will keep both teams on the court anytime replay is used at the end of 
the fourth period or overtime period.

RULE NO. 14—COACH’S CHALLENGE
Section I—Overview
a.	 A head coach may trigger instant replay review of certain events subject to the terms 
and conditions set forth in this rule.  Instant replay review triggered pursuant to this rule shall be 
referred to as a “Coach’s Challenge” (or “Challenge” for short).
b.	 Each team is entitled to one Challenge per game. If a team’s first Challenge is 
successful, the team will be awarded a second Challenge. 
c.	 A team may utilize a Challenge to trigger instant replay review of only the following 
three events: (1) a called personal foul charged to its own team, (2) a called out-of-bounds 
violation where its own team was not awarded possession, or (3) a called goaltending or basket 
interference violation; provided that, in the last two minutes of the fourth period and last two 
minutes of any overtime, a team is no longer able to utilize a Challenge to trigger instant replay 
review of a called goaltending or basket interference violation, as review of these events during 
these periods will be exclusively triggered by the on-court game officials. 
NOTE: A Coach’s Challenge is the only mechanism to trigger replay review of out-of-
bounds violations at any point during the game.
d.	 Any called foul, violation, or other decision by the game officials not listed in Section 
I(c) above, or any non-call, is not a challengeable event. For clarity, instant replay review of the 
following events, among others, may not be triggered by a Challenge: (1) a called personal foul 
charged to the opposing team, (2) continuation—e.g., whether a defensive foul occurred prior to 
the offensive player beginning his shooting motion, (3) a Technical Foul or Flagrant Foul, and 
(4) violations such as traveling, carrying, double dribble, flopping, or an offensive or defensive 
three-seconds. As set forth in Section III(a)(3) below, any aspect related to continuation 
constitutes a reviewable matter when a called foul is properly challenged, but continuation is 
not by itself an independent challengeable event.
Section II—Procedure to Initiate the Challenge
a.	 To initiate a Challenge, the challenging team must take the following steps in sequence:
(1)	The challenging team must call a legal timeout immediately after the call in 
question (unless a mandatory timeout or timeout called by the opposing team is 
already underway);
(2)	 The challenging team’s head coach must simultaneously signal for a Challenge 
by utilizing the instant replay signal (i.e., twirling an index finger) toward the game 
official(s) during the same interaction with the game official(s) in which the timeout 
was called or, if the timeout was called by a player on the challenging team, the 
challenging team’s head coach must simultaneously signal for the Challenge by 
utilizing the instant replay signal toward the game officials as the game official is 
notifying the scorekeeper of the timeout; and
(3)	During the same interaction with the game official(s) in which the challenging 
team’s head coach signaled for the Challenge, the challenging team’s head coach must 
notify the game official(s) of the specific event that the team is challenging.
For purposes of this rule only, “immediately” shall mean that a timeout is called prior to 
the ball being given to the thrower-in, the ball being given to the free throw shooter, or 
the ball being tossed on a jump ball, whichever is applicable (unless a mandatory timeout 
or timeout called by the opposing team is already underway).  
b.	 To initiate a Challenge of an event that immediately preceded a mandatory timeout or 
timeout called by the opposing team, no later than 30 seconds from the start of the timeout (as 
measured by the timeout clock), the challenging team’s head coach must take the following steps 
in sequence:  
(1)	Signal for a Challenge by utilizing the instant replay signal toward the game 
officials; and

(2)	During the same interaction with the game official(s) in which the challenging 
team’s head coach signaled for the Challenge, the challenging team’s head coach must 
notify the game official(s) of the specific event that the team is challenging.
c.	 In the event the game officials conference to determine the call on the floor (and, as a 
result, the final ruling on the play is unknown for a period of time), the window of time within 
which a team must immediately challenge the call starts after the officials notify the negatively 
affected team of the final ruling on the play. The negatively affected team’s window to challenge 
the final ruling on the play ends when the ball is given to the inbounder or free throw shooter, 
jump-ball is tossed, or 30 seconds after the team has been notified of the final ruling on the play in 
the event that a mandatory timeout or timeout by the opposing team has been called (whichever 
is applicable).
d.	 A team loses its opportunity to challenge the prior call if it is called for a delay-of-game 
after the call in question but prior to calling timeout and simultaneously signaling for a Challenge.
e.	 Once instant replay review is triggered by a valid Challenge, the official will notify 
the official scorer of the Challenge. The official scorer shall immediately record the Challenge 
and, once the instant replay review process is complete, the outcome of the Challenge (including 
whether the Challenge resulted in a loss of one timeout for the challenging team).
Section III—Reviewable Matters
a.	 If an instant replay review of a called foul is triggered by a Challenge, the on-court crew 
chief will review the video to evaluate whether the foul being challenged was correctly called.  
The on-court crew chief may also review the video to determine only the following other 
matters:
(1)	Whether the correct player (including a player on the opposing team) was called 
for the foul;
(2)	Whether a different foul proximate to the called foul should have been called;   
(3)	Any aspect related to continuation, including, but not limited to: 
(a)	Whether the foul occurred prior to the offensive player beginning his shooting 
motion if the foul is committed by a defensive player; 
(b)	Whether a made basket that the on-court game officials counted shall not 
count because an offensive player committed a violation after the offensive player 
gathered the ball; and
(c)	Whether a made basket disallowed by the on-court game officials shall count 
because the shot constituted legal continuation.
(4)	Whether a goaltending or basket interference violation occurred on the play;
(5)	Whether the game clock expired prior to the foul; 
(6)	Whether the shot clock expired prior to the foul; 
(7)	If an offensive player was fouled while in possession of the ball, whether the player 
who was fouled committed a boundary line violation either just prior to or after the foul;
(8)	Whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the player was fouled; and 
(9)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
(10)	Whether a flopping violation proximate to the called foul should be assessed or 
rescinded.
NOTE: For purposes of Section III (a) (2 and 10) above, the factors that will be 
considered in determining whether a prior uncalled foul and/or flopping violation is 
proximate to the called foul include (1) whether the players involved in the uncalled 
foul and/or flopping violation are the same or different players than the ones involved 
in the called foul under review, (2) the distance between the uncalled foul and/or 
flopping violation, and the called foul under review, and (3) the time elapsed between 
the uncalled foul and/or flopping violation, and the called foul under review.

b.	 If an instant replay review of an out-of-bounds violation is triggered by a Challenge, 
the Replay Center Official will review the video to evaluate whether the out-of-bounds violation 
was correctly called.   
The Replay Center Official may also review the video to determine only the following 
other matters: 
(1)	Whether the game clock expired prior to the ball being out-of-bounds;
(2)	Whether the shot clock expired prior to the ball being out-of-bounds;
(3)	Whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred prior to the ball being out-of-
bounds;
(4)	How much time remains in the period and/or on the shot clock;
(5)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred; and
(6)	If the out-of-bounds violation called on the floor is overturned and that call 
occurred simultaneous to a successful shot attempt by the offensive player, whether 
the whistle sounded before or after the player started his shooting motion (See Rule 
14, Section VI).
(7)	Whether a foul proximate to the out-of-bounds violation should have been called.
NOTE: For purposes of Section III (b) (7) above, the factors that will be considered 
in determining whether a prior uncalled foul is proximate to the out-of-bounds 
violation include (1) whether the players involved in the uncalled foul are the same 
or different players than the ones involved in the out-of-bounds violation under 
review, (2) the distance between the uncalled foul and the out-of-bounds violation 
under review, and (3) the time elapsed between the uncalled foul and the out-of-
bounds violation under review.
c.	 If an instant replay review of a goaltending or basket interference violation is triggered 
by a Challenge, the Replay Center Official will review the video to evaluate whether the call on 
the floor was correct.
The Replay Center Official may also review the video to determine only the following 
other matters: 
(1)	If goaltending or basket interference was ruled prior to the ball touching the rim, 
whether the shooter committed a boundary line violation; provided that, for purposes 
of this review, the Replay Center Official will look only at the position of the shooter’s 
feet at the moment they last touched the floor immediately prior to (or, if applicable, 
during) the release of the shot and the flight of the ball;
(2)	If goaltending or basket interference was ruled prior to the ball touching the rim, 
whether an 8-second backcourt violation occurred before the ball left the shooter’s 
hand; and
(3)	Whether any unsportsmanlike acts or unnecessary contact occurred.
Section IV—Replay Review Process 
a.	 The on-court crew chief will determine the final outcome when instant replay review 
of a called foul is triggered by a Challenge, with personnel in the Replay Center playing a 
supporting role.  
b.	 The Replay Center Official will determine the final outcome when instant replay 
review of a called out-of-bounds violation or called goaltending or basket interference violation 
is triggered by a Challenge.

EXCEPTION:  For pre-season or regular season games conducted outside an NBA arena, 
the on-court crew chief will determine the final outcome of any replay review triggered by a 
Challenge.
c.	 To overturn a challenged event or to change the outcome of a reviewable matter via a 
Challenge, there must be clear and conclusive visual evidence that the initial adjudication of that 
aspect of the play was incorrect.  
d.	 Once the instant replay review process is triggered by a Challenge, the on-court crew 
chief or Replay Center Official (as appropriate) shall arrive at one of two determinations with 
respect to the call that was challenged: 
(1)	The call stands (i.e., there is not clear and conclusive visual evidence that the call 
was incorrect); or 
(2)	The call is overturned (i.e., there is clear and conclusive visual evidence that the 
call was incorrect).   
Section V—Impact on Timeouts 
a.	 If the call subject to review pursuant to a Challenge is not overturned, the Challenge is 
deemed unsuccessful and the challenging team loses its timeout.
b.	 If the call subject to review pursuant to a team’s first Challenge is overturned, the 
Challenge is deemed successful and the challenging team retains its timeout unless the timeout 
taken in conjunction with the Challenge initiated a mandatory timeout, and is awarded a second 
Challenge.  
If a Challenge is utilized to trigger instant replay review of a called foul, that Challenge 
shall only be deemed successful if the called foul is overturned (i.e., not assigned to the player 
who was originally called for the foul) because the review results in either:     
(1)	No foul assigned to any player (including if the foul was overturned because a 
reviewable violation occurred prior to the foul); or 
(2)	A foul assigned to a different player (including a different player on the challenging 
team).  
If a Challenge is utilized to trigger instant replay review of a called foul, that Challenge 
shall be deemed unsuccessful if the foul remains assigned to the player originally called for the 
foul regardless of whether any other reviewable matters are changed to the challenging team’s 
benefit. For the sake of clarity, it shall be deemed an unsuccessful Challenge if a called foul is 
not overturned but changed from a shooting foul (that would have resulted in free throws for the 
opposing team) to a non-shooting foul (that does not result in free throws for the opposing team).
If a Challenge is utilized to trigger instant replay review of an out-of-bounds violation, that 
Challenge shall only be deemed successful if the call on the floor is overturned to the challenging 
team’s benefit because the review results in:
(1)	Possession awarded to the challenging team (after the officials on the floor had 
(i) awarded possession to the opposing team, or (ii) been unable to determine which 
team last touched the ball and thus signaled for a jump ball);
(2)	A jump ball, based on clear and conclusive visual evidence that both teams 
simultaneously last touched the ball (after the officials on the floor had awarded 
possession to the opposing team); or
(3)	A foul proximate to the out-of-bounds violation assessed to the opposing team and 
possession awarded to the challenging team.
If a team utilizes its second Challenge, the challenging team will not retain the timeout used 
to initiate its second Challenge even if the Challenge is successful.

c.	 If a team utilizes a Challenge to trigger instant replay review of an event that immediately 
preceded the challenging team’s mandatory timeout, the challenging team will lose its mandatory 
timeout (even if the Challenge is successful). If the Challenge is unsuccessful, the challenging 
team will only be charged one timeout (i.e., it will not be charged a timeout for both the mandatory 
timeout and the Challenge).
d.	 If a team utilizes its first Challenge to trigger instant replay review of an event that 
preceded the opposing team’s mandatory timeout, the team that is ultimately charged with the 
timeout depends on whether the Challenge is successful:
(1)	If the Challenge is unsuccessful, the challenging team will be assigned the 
timeout and, notwithstanding that the Challenge coincided with the opposing team’s 
mandatory timeout, the opposing team will not be charged for the timeout (and, if 
another mandatory timeout is remaining in the period, the next mandatory timeout will 
be assigned to the opposing team); and 
(2)	If the Challenge is successful, the challenging team will not be assigned a timeout 
and the opposing team will be charged with the timeout.
If a team utilizes its second Challenge to trigger instant replay review of an event that 
preceded the opposing team’s mandatory timeout, the challenging team will be assigned the 
timeout (even if the Challenge is successful).
e.	 If a team utilizes its first Challenge to trigger instant replay review of an event that 
preceded a timeout called by the opposing team, the team that is ultimately charged with the 
timeout depends on whether the Challenge is successful:
(1)	If the Challenge is unsuccessful, the challenging team will be assigned the timeout 
and, notwithstanding that the opposing team initially called the timeout, the opposing 
team will not be charged for the timeout; and
(2)	If the Challenge is successful, the challenging team will not be assigned a timeout 
and the opposing team will be charged with the timeout. 
If a team utilizes its second Challenge to trigger instant replay review of an event that 
preceded a timeout called by the opposing team, the challenging team will be assigned the 
timeout (even if the Challenge is successful).  
f.	 If a team attempts to utilize a Challenge to trigger instant replay review of an event when 
that team has no remaining timeouts, no Challenge will take place, and that team shall be charged 
with an excessive timeout, for which the penalty is a Technical Foul. 
g.	 If a team attempts to utilize a Challenge to trigger instant replay of an event that may not 
be reviewed, the team will be charged a timeout but retain its Challenge.   
Section VI—Resumption of Play
If a Challenge results in the call on the floor being overturned following instant replay 
review, play is resumed at the point of interruption (as defined in Rule 4, Section XIV).  
For purposes of this rule only, the point of interruption is where the ball is located when the 
whistle sounds; provided that:
(1)	If the defensive team utilizes a Challenge to trigger instant replay review of a 
defensive foul that occurred after an offensive player started his shooting motion on 
a successful shot attempt, and the defensive foul itself is overturned after the replay 
review, the basket shall count (regardless of when the whistle sounded) and the 
defensive team is awarded the ball to start the next possession; and
(2)	If the offensive team utilizes a Challenge to trigger instant replay review of an out-
of-bounds violation that occurred simultaneous to a successful shot attempt by the 
offensive player and the whistle sounded after the offensive player started his shooting 
motion, and the out-of-bounds violation is overturned after replay review, the basket 
shall count and the defensive team is awarded the ball to start the next possession.

COMMENTS ON THE RULES
I. GUIDES FOR ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICATION OF THE RULES
Each official should have a definite and clear conception of their overall responsibilities. 
It is essential for them to know, understand and implement the rules as intended. If all officials 
possess the same conception, there will be a guaranteed uniformity in the administration of 
all contests.
The restrictions placed upon the player by the rules are intended to create a balance 
of play, equal opportunity for the defense and the offense, provide reasonable safety and 
protection for all players and emphasize cleverness and skill without unduly limiting freedom 
of action of player or team.
The purpose of penalties is to compensate a player who has been placed at a disadvantage 
through an illegal act of an opponent and to restrain players from committing acts which, 
if ignored, might lead to roughness even though they do not affect the immediate play.
II. BASIC PRINCIPLES
A.	
CONTACT SITUATIONS
1.	 Incidental Contact
The mere fact that contact occurs does not necessarily constitute a foul. Contact which 
is incidental to an effort by a player to play an opponent, reach a loose ball, or perform 
normal defensive or offensive movements, should not be considered illegal. If, however, a 
player attempts to play an opponent from a position where he has no reasonable chance to 
perform without making contact with his opponent, the responsibility is on the player in this 
position.
The hand is considered “part of the ball” when it is in contact with the ball. Therefore, 
contact on that part of the hand by a defender while it is in contact with the ball is not illegal.
2.	 Guarding an Opponent
In all guarding situations, a player is entitled to any spot on the court he desires, 
provided he legally gets to that spot first and without contact with an opponent. If a defensive 
or offensive player has established a position on the floor and his opponent initiates contact 
that results in the dislodging of the opponent, a foul should be called IMMEDIATELY.
During all throw-ins, the defensive player(s) must be allowed to take a position 
between his man and the basket.
A player may continue to move after gaining a guarding position in the path of an 
opponent provided he is not moving directly or obliquely toward his opponent when contact 
occurs. A player is never permitted to move into the path of an opponent after the opponent 
has started his upward jumping motion.
A player who extends a hand, forearm, shoulder, hip or leg into the path of an opponent 
and thereby causes contact is not considered to have a legal position in the path of an 
opponent.
A player is entitled to a vertical position even to the extent of jumping straight-up or 
holding his arms above his shoulders, as in post play or when double-teaming in pressing 
tactics.

Any player who conforms to the above is absolved from responsibility for any contact 
by an opponent which may dislodge or tend to dislodge such player from the position which he 
has attained and is maintaining legally. If contact occurs, the official must decide whether the 
contact is incidental or a foul has been committed.
3.	 Screening
When a player screens in front of or at the side of a stationary opponent, he may be as 
close as he desires providing he does not make contact. His opponent can see him and, there- 
fore, is expected to detour around the screen.
If he screens behind a stationary opponent, the opponent must be able to take a normal 
step backward without contact. Because the opponent is not expected to see a screener 
behind him, the player screened is given latitude of movement. The defender must be given an 
opportunity to change direction and avoid contact with the screener.
To screen a moving opponent, the player must stop soon enough to permit his opponent 
the opportunity to avoid contact. The distance between the player screening and his opponent 
will depend upon the speed at which the players are moving.
If two opponents are moving in the same direction and path, the player who is behind is 
responsible for contact. The player in front may stop or slow his pace, but he may not move 
backward or sideward into his opponent. The player in front may or may not have the ball. 
This situation assumes the two players have been moving in identically the same direction 
and path before contact.
4.	 The Dribble
If the dribbler’s path is blocked, he is expected to pass or shoot; that is, he should not 
try to dribble by an opponent unless there is a reasonable chance of getting by without contact.
B.	
FOULS: FLAGRANT—UNSPORTSMANLIKE
To be unsportsmanlike is to act in a manner unbecoming to the image of professional 
basketball. It consists of acts of deceit, disrespect of officials and profanity. The penalty for 
such action is a technical foul. Repeated acts shall result in expulsion from the game and a 
minimum fine of $2,000.
A flagrant foul—penalty (1) is unnecessary contact committed by a player against an 
opponent.
A flagrant foul—penalty (2) is unnecessary and excessive contact committed by a 
player against an opponent. It is an unsportsmanlike act and the offender is ejected following 
confirmation by instant replay review.
The offender will be subject to a fine not exceeding $100,000 and/or suspension by 
the Commissioner.
See Rule 12B, Section IV for interpretation and penalties.
C.	
BLOCK-CHARGE
A defensive player is permitted to establish a legal guarding position in the path of a 
dribbler regardless of his speed and distance.
A defensive player is not permitted to move into the path of an offensive player once he 
has started his upward motion to attempt a field goal or pass.
A defensive player must allow a moving player the opportunity to avoid contact when 
the offensive player receives a pass outside the lower defensive box. The lower defensive box 
is the area between the 3-foot posted-up marks, the bottom tip of the circle and the endline.

A defensive player must allow an airborne player the opportunity to land and then avoid 
contact when the offensive player is outside the lower defensive box.
A defensive player is permitted to establish a legal guarding position in the path of an 
offensive player who receives a pass inside the lower defensive box regardless of his speed 
and distance.
A defensive player must allow an airborne player who receives a pass the space to land 
when the offensive player is inside the lower defensive box.
A player must allow a moving opponent without the ball the opportunity to avoid 
contact if he moves into his path.
The speed of the player will determine the amount of distance an opponent must allow.
If an offensive player causes contact with a defensive player who has established a legal 
position, an offensive foul shall be called and no points may be scored. A defensive player 
may turn slightly to protect himself, but is never allowed to bend over and submarine an 
opponent.
An offensive foul should not be called for charging if the contact is with a secondary 
defensive player who has established a defensive position within a designated “restricted 
area” near the basket for the purpose of drawing an offensive foul. The offensive player must 
take a path directly to the rim. The “restricted area” for this purpose is the area bounded by an 
arc with a 4-foot radius measured from the center of the basket ring.
EXCEPTION: Any player may be legally positioned within the “restricted area” if the 
offensive player receives the ball within the Lower Defensive Box.
The mere fact that contact occurs on these type of plays, or any other similar play, does 
not necessarily mean that a personal foul has been committed. The officials must decide 
whether the contact is negligible and/or incidental, judging each situation separately.
An offensive foul shall be assessed if the player initiates contact in a non-basketball 
manner (leads with his foot, an unnatural extended knee, etc.).
D.	
GAME POSTPONEMENT AND CANCELLATIONS
Whether made before a game begins or after a game has begun, the decision to postpone or 
cancel a game can only be made by the League Office, after consultation with the affected teams.
The NBA may postpone or cancel a game before the game begins or after the game has 
begun for issues related to the condition of the playing court or arena, or a general or forecasted 
condition involving weather, travel, civil unrest, natural disaster, public and/or player and staff 
health and safety, or another unusual situation.
The factors that the NBA may consider in determining whether to postpone or cancel a 
game include:
(1)	The whereabouts of teams and game officials (including the efforts that have been 
made or can be made to get these participants to the game site).
(2)	Whether sufficient team and arena staff are available to operate the arena and 
conduct the game.
(3)	Input from both teams.
(4)	The health, safety, and well-being of game participants, team and arena staff, 
and fans.
(5)	Input from health, facilities, security, or other experts, when appropriate.
(6)	Input from players involved.
(7)	Communications with and/or mandates by state or local government officials and 
law enforcement.

(8)	The ability to reschedule the game, including with consideration for impact to the 
league-wide schedule, competitive fairness, and league and team business opportunities.
(9)	Any other factor that the NBA deems relevant to the decision.
In the event of a situation that arises after a game has begun, the game officials have the 
authority to decide whether to temporarily delay the game while the decision to postpone or 
cancel is being made by the NBA.
E.	
PHYSICAL CONTACT—SUSPENSION
Any player or coach guilty of intentional physical contact with an official shall 
automatically be suspended without pay for one game. A fine and/or longer period of suspension 
will result if circumstances so dictate.
F.	
PROTEST
Protests are not permitted during the course of a game. In order to file a protest, the 
procedure, as set forth in the NBA Constitution, is as follows: “In order to protest against or 
appeal from the result of a game, notice thereof must be given to the Commissioner within forty-
eight (48) hours after the conclusion of said game, by a Writing, stating therein the grounds for 
such protest. No protest may be filed in connection with any game played during the Regular 
Season after midnight of the day of the last game of the regular schedule, or, for a game played 
on the last day of the Regular Season, more than ten (10) hours following the game’s conclusion. 
A protest in connection with a playoff game must be filed not later than ten (10) hours following 
the game’s conclusion. A game may be protest may only be filed by a Governor, Alternate 
Governor, General Manager, or Head Coach. The right of protest shall inure not only to the 
immediately allegedly aggrieved contestants, but to any other Member who can show an interest 
in the grounds of protest and the results that might be attained if the protest were allowed. No 
protest shall be valid unless the Written Notice to the Commissioner thereof is accompanied by 
a payment in the sum of $25,000 (the “Protest Fee”) payable to the Association. If the Member 
filing the protest prevails, the Protest Fee is to be refunded. If the Member does not prevail, the 
Protest Fee is to be forfeited and retained in the Association treasury.
“Upon receipt of a protest, the Commissioner shall at once notify the Member operating 
the opposing team in the game protested and require both of said members within five (5) days 
to file with him such evidence as he may desire bearing upon the issue. The Commissioner shall 
decide the question raised within five (5) days after such evidence is due.  Notwithstanding the 
foregoing, for a protest in connection with a Playoff Game or any other situation where greater 
expedition is required, the filing of evidence by Members and the Commissioner’s decision of 
the question raised each shall occur on a schedule as determined by the Commissioner.”
G.	
SHATTERING BACKBOARDS
Any player whose contact with the basket ring or backboard causes the backboard to 
shatter or makes the ring unplayable will be penalized in the following manner:
(1)	Pre-game and/or halftime warm-ups—No penalty to be assessed by officials.
(2)	During the game—non-unsportsmanlike conduct technical foul. Under no 
circumstances will that player be ejected from the game.
The Commissioner will review all actions and plays involved in the shattering of 
a backboard.
H.	
PLAYER/TEAM CONDUCT AND DRESS
(1)	Each player when introduced, prior to the game, must be uniformly dressed.
(2)	Players, coaches and trainers must stand and line up in a dignified posture along the 
foul lines during the playing of the American and/or Canadian national anthems.

(3)	Players not in uniform (whether on the Active List or Inactive List) must wear dress 
attire that is clean and neat in appearance (e.g., league approved team-issued apparel). 
“Athleisure” (including, but not limited to, jogger pants, jumpsuits, sweatpants, etc.) 
or similar attire is not permitted when seated on the bench during games (except that, 
as previously noted, league approved team-issued apparel is permissible).
(4)	While playing, players must keep their uniform shirts tucked into their pants, and 
no T-shirts are allowed.
(5)	The only article bearing a commercial ‘logo’ which can be worn by players is 
their shoes.
I.	
OFFENSIVE THREE-SECONDS
The offensive player cannot be allowed in the three-second lane for more than the 
allotted time. This causes the defensive player to ‘hand-check’ because he cannot control the 
offensive player for that extended period of time.
If the offensive player is in the three-second lane for less than three seconds and 
receives the ball, he must make a move toward the hoop for the official to discontinue his three 
second count. If he attempts to back the defensive player down, attempting to secure a better 
position in relation to the basket, offensive three seconds or an offensive foul must be called. If 
he passes off and immediately makes a move out of the lane, there should be no whistle.
J.	
PLAYER CONDUCT—SPECTATORS
Any coach, player, trainer, or other team bench person who deliberately enters the 
spectator stands during the game will be automatically ejected and the incident reported by 
e-mail to Basketball Operations. Entering the stands to keep a ball in play by a player or the 
momentum which carries the player into the stands is not considered deliberate. The first row of 
seats is considered the beginning of the stands.
K.	
FIGHTING
Violent acts of any nature on the court will not be tolerated. Players involved in 
altercations will be ejected, fined and/or suspended.
There is absolutely no justification for fighting in an NBA game. The fact that a player 
may feel provoked by another person is not an acceptable excuse. If a player takes it upon 
himself to retaliate, he can expect to be subject to appropriate penalties.
L.	
EXPIRATION OF TIME
NO LESS THAN :00.3 must expire on the game clock and shot clock when a ball 
is thrown inbounds and then hit instantly out-of-bounds. If less than :00.3 expires in such a 
situation, the timer will be instructed to deduct AT LEAST :00.3 from the game clock and shot 
clock. If, in the judgment of the official, the play took longer than :00.3, he/she will instruct 
the timer to deduct more time. If :00.3 or less remain on the game clock when this situation 
occurs, the period is over. If :00.3 or less remain on the shot clock when this situation 
occurs, a shot clock violation is called.
The game clock and shot clock must show :00.3 or more in order for a player to secure 
possession of the ball on a rebound or throw-in to attempt a field goal. Instant replay shall be 
utilized if the basket is successful on this type of play and the game clock runs to 0:00 or the 
shot clock expires on a made basket and the officials are not reasonably certain that the ball 
was released prior to the expiration of the shot clock. The only type of field goal which may be 
scored if the game clock and shot clock are at :00.2 or :00.1 is a “tip-in” or “high lob.”
A “tip-in” is defined as any action in which the ball is deflected, not controlled, by a 
player and then enters the basket ring. This type of action shall be deemed legal if :00.1 or 
more remains in a period.

A “high lob” is defined as a pass which is tipped by an offensive player while in mid- 
air, and is followed instantaneously by a field goal attempt. If the reception of the pass and the 
subsequent “slam dunk” is immediately adjacent to the basket ring, this type of action shall 
be deemed legal if :00.1 or more remains in a period. However, if the “high lob” attempt 
is a distance from the basket ring whereby the ball must be controlled in mid-air, either one-
handed or two-handed, a minimum of :00.3 is necessary for a field goal to score if successful. 
Instant replay would NOT be used if the play starts with :00.2 or :00.1 on the game 
clock or shot clock.NO LESS than :00.3 must expire on the game clock when a player secures 
possession of an unsuccessful free throw attempt and immediately requests a timeout. If LESS 
than :00.3 expires in such a circumstance, the time on the game clock shall be reduced by at 
least :00.3. Therefore, if :00.3 OR LESS remain on the game clock when the above situation 
exists, and a player requests a timeout upon securing possession of the ball, the period is over.
Regardless of when the horn or red light operates to signify the end of period, the 
officials (as aided by instant replay, if required) will ultimately make the final decision whether 
to allow or disallow a successful field goal. THE CREW CHIEF MUST TAKE CHARGE 
OF THE SITUATION.
M.	 VERBAL FAN INTERFERENCE
Any spectator who verbally abuses players and/or coaches in a manner which, in the 
opinion of the game officials, interferes with the ability of a coach to communicate with his 
players during the game and/or huddles, will, at the direction of the crew chief, be given one 
warning by a building security officer. If the same spectator continues to behave in a like manner, 
the crew chief shall direct a building security officer to eject the spectator from the arena.
N.	
GUIDELINES FOR INFECTION CONTROL
In addition to any health- or safety-related rules established by the NBA, all NBA team 
physicians, athletic trainers, equipment managers, and related personnel must comply with the 
infection control procedures set forth below (in this Section N) in all NBA arenas, locker rooms, 
training rooms, and practice facilities. 
If a player suffers a laceration or a wound where bleeding occurs or if blood is visible on 
a player or his uniform, the officials shall suspend the game at the earliest appropriate time and 
allow a maximum of 30 seconds for treatment. After that time, the head coach shall be informed 
that he has the option to substitute for the player or call a timeout. If a substitute replaces the 
player, the opposing team shall be allowed to substitute one player. The bleeding player may 
return to the game when he has received appropriate treatment by medical staff personnel.
A team will not be given an additional 30 seconds should the bleeding occur from a 
wound which reopened, which is not the result of additional contact.
If the player returns to the game, the officials shall make certain that any lesion, wound 
or dermatitis is covered with a dressing that will prevent contamination to and/or from other 
sources. A wrist or sweat band is not considered a suitable bandage.
If the bleeding player is awarded a free throw attempt(s) as a result of a personal foul, 
or is involved in a jump ball, the bleeding player will be given 30 seconds for treatment. 
If the treatment is not completed, play will resume and will then be suspended at the first 
appropriate time.
Mandatory timeouts shall not be granted during a suspension of play unless a team is 
granted a timeout. 
If treatment is not completed within the allotted time, the head coach may call another 
timeout or substitute for the bleeding player. Substitutes are permitted consistent with existing 
rules on substitution.

If a team has no timeouts remaining when play is suspended, the officials will allow 30 
seconds for appropriate treatment. If the treatment is not completed in accordance with para- 
graph two above, the bleeding player must be removed immediately. ONLY the bleeding 
player on that team may be removed from the game under these circumstances. If so, the 
opponent may also substitute one player.
The offensive team will receive a full eight seconds to advance the ball into the front- 
court. The shot clock will remain as is or reset to 14, whichever is greater.
O.	
DEAD BALL, LIVE BALL, BALL IS ALIVE
After the ball has been dead, it is put into play by a jump ball, throw-in or a free throw 
attempt. The game clock does not start until the ball is legally touched on the court by a 
player. However, any floor violation or personal foul which may occur will be penalized.
The ball is live when it is given to the thrower-in, free throw shooter or is tossed by the 
official on a jump ball. Illegal contact, which occurs prior to the ball becoming live, will be 
ignored if it is not unsportsmanlike or flagrant.
The ball is alive when it is legally tapped by one of the participants of a jump ball, 
released by a thrower-in or released on a free throw attempt that will remain in play.
P.	
TAUNTING
If a player blatantly taunts an opponent, a technical foul shall be assessed. The 
opponent WILL NOT, automatically, be assessed a technical foul. His behavior will be the 
determining factor.
Simultaneous taunting is a verbal altercation. Verbal altercations and unsportsmanlike 
conduct will be administered as a double technical foul and no free throws will be attempted.
Technical fouls assessed to opposing teams during the same dead ball and prior to the 
administering of any free throw attempt for the first technical foul, shall be interpreted as a 
double technical foul.
A PLAYER(S) GUILTY OF TAUNTING MUST BE SINGLED OUT AND PENALIZED.
If a previous unsportsmanlike act has been committed and if this situation is BLATANT, 
a technical foul must be assessed and the guilty player(s) must be ejected.
Q.	
FLAGRANT FOUL CRITERIA
1.	 The severity of the contact;
2.	 Whether or not the player was making a legitimate basketball play (e.g., whether 
a player is making a legitimate effort to block a shot; note, however, that a foul 
committed during a block attempt can still be considered flagrant if other criteria are 
present, such as recklessness and hard contact to the head);
3.	 Whether, on a foul committed with a player’s arm or hand, the fouling player 
wound up and/or followed through after making contact;
4.	 The potential for injury resulting from contact (e.g., a blow to the head and a 
foul committed while a player is in a vulnerable position);
5.	 The severity of any injury suffered by the offended player; and
6.	 The outcome of the contact (e.g., whether it led to an altercation).